IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

1843

Prediction of Freezing of Gait in Parkinson’s From
Physiological Wearables: An Exploratory Study
Sinziana Mazilu, Alberto Calatroni, Eran Gazit, Anat Mirelman, Jeffrey M. Hausdorff, and Gerhard Tröster

Abstract—Freezing of gait (FoG) is a common gait impairment
among patients with advanced Parkinson’s disease. FoG is associated with falls and negatively impacts the patient’s quality of life.
Wearable systems that detect FoG in real time have been developed to help patients resume walking by means of rhythmic cueing.
Current methods focus on detection, which require FoG events to
happen first, while their prediction opens the road to preemptive
cueing, which might help subjects to avoid freeze altogether. We
analyzed electrocardiography (ECG) and skin-conductance (SC)
data from 11 subjects who experience FoG in daily life, and found
statistically significant changes in ECG and SC data just before the
FoG episodes, compared to normal walking. Based on these findings, we developed an anomaly-based algorithm for predicting gait
freeze from relevant SC features. We were able to predict 71.3%
from 184 FoG with an average of 4.2 s before a freeze episode
happened. Our findings enable the possibility of wearable systems,
which predict with few seconds before an upcoming FoG from SC,
and start external cues to help the user avoid the gait freeze.
Index Terms—Body-fixed sensors, electrocardiography (ECG),
freezing of gait (FoG), Parkinson’s disease (PD), prediction, skin
conductance (SC), wearables.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARKINSON’S disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease with a worldwide prevalence estimated at 16.1 million
people [1] and expected to double by 2050. PD is characterized
by postural instability, rigidity, reduced movement range, and
tremor. According to a survey of 6620 PD patients, 47% of them
reported regular freezing of gait (FoG), and 28% on a daily basis
[2]. FoG is a “brief, episodic absence, or marked reduction of
forward progression of the feet despite the intention to walk”
[3]. It is typically sudden and transient, lasting usually from
a few seconds up to few minutes [3], during which the motor

P

Manuscript received April 6, 2015; revised July 2, 2015; accepted July 28,
2015. Date of publication August 5, 2015; date of current version November 3,
2015.
S. Mazilu, A. Calatroni, and G. Tröster are with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Information Technology, ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland (e-mail: sinziana.mazilu@ife.ee.ethz.ch; alberto.calatroni@ife.ee.ethz.ch;
troester@ife.ee.ethz.ch).
E. Gazit and A. Mirelman are with the Center for the Study of Movement, Cognition and Mobility, Department of Neurology, Tel Aviv Sourasky
Medical Center, Tel Aviv 64239, Israel (e-mail: erang@tasmc.health.gov.il;
anatmi@tasmc.health.gov.il).
J. M. Hausdorff is with the Center for the Study of Movement, Cognition
and Mobility, Department of Neurology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center,
Tel Aviv 64239, Israel, and also with the Sagol School of Neuroscience and
the Department of Physical Therapy, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: jhausdor@tasmc.health.gov.il).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2465134

system is blocked. FoG is a severe problem, since it is associated
with falls [4], anxiety, loss of mobility, mortality [5], and has
substantial clinical and social consequences which decrease the
quality of life [6], [7]. Hence, it is important to build systems
that can help reducing FoG incidence.
FoG does not respond well to pharmaceutical treatment. Nevertheless, clinical studies [8]–[10] suggest that rhythmical cueing synchronized with the gait, like periodic lines projected on
the floor or metronome ticking sounds, can help patients to exit
the freezing state and resume walking. Wearable systems using
body-worn accelerometers [11], [12] can detect FoG and deliver
a rhythmical cue upon its detection. While such systems are already beneficial in shortening the freeze duration [12], [13],
they cannot help the user to avoid FoG, since they need at least
some hundreds of milliseconds to react to the existent episode
[11], [12]. A further step is to predict when a subject is about to
experience FoG, thus enabling preemptive cueing. We refer to
this FoG prediction, different from FoG detection.
A known aspect that was not exploited until now is that mental
conditions might play an important role in the pathogenesis of
FoG [14]. Factors such as stress and anxiety are linked to and
likely contribute to FoG occurrence [6], [15]. These factors
have a measurable influence on physiological signals like heart
activity or skin conductance (SC), modalities which have been
used in previous research to reflect the emotional state, stress,
and anxiety in daily life [16], [17].
We, therefore, make a step further and study whether physiological data such as electrocardiogram (ECG) or SC show
specific variations before FoG. We hypothesize that changes in
the ECG and SC might occur during and just before FoG as
a reflection of the emotional and cognitive state of the patient,
factors associated with provoking FoG [6]. Such changes could
potentially also help in predicting FoG.
Our study has also a practical motivation: Commonplace
wearable technologies such as wristwatches or wristbands that
collect heart rate (HR) or electrodermal activity information in
real time enable the possibility of unobtrusively and continuously monitoring the user in daily-life settings. We envision
systems that recognize in real time anomalies in the physiological data from such sensors before a gait freeze might occur, and
which deliver preemptive rhythmical cueing, with the goal of
avoiding FoG altogether.
Our work tackles two research questions:
(1) Are there specific and statistically significant changes in the
ECG and/or SC before and during FoG, compared to the rest of
walking?
(2) Can we predict that a FoG will happen with few seconds
before from physiological data?

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1844

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

To answer them, we make the following contributions:
(a) We collect ECG and SC from 11 subjects in a laboratory
setting, where 184 FoG episodes are identified.
(b) We analyze the variations of specific features extracted from
ECG and SC for periods of data just before, during, and just
after FoG events, compared to normal walking events, for each
subject.
(c) We propose a method for predicting gait-freeze events using
SC features and multivariate Gaussians.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior work that
targets prediction of FoG from patterns in SC, leading to a
proposed prediction algorithm.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we survey the state-of-the-art regarding detection and
attempts of prediction of FoG and summarize how ECG and SC
data have been used to detect the emotional state. Section III details the collected dataset. In Sections IV and V, we describe our
data-driven study and findings regarding FoG prediction from
physiological sensors. In Section VI, we present a vision of a
wearable assistant for predicting FoG episodes. We conclude
our work in Section VII.

II. RELATED WORK
We survey three groups of studies related to FoG research,
followed by a review on the use of wearable sensors for mental
state recognition:
1) Works on FoG detection through sensor data captured by
wearable sensors.
2) Studies on changes in brain activity and FoG prediction.
3) Investigations on potential links between FoG and mental
conditions, which lead to visible changes in physiological data.

A. FoG and Wearable Systems
Many research studies have described methods for detecting
FoG in real time using wearables [7], [11]–[13], [18]–[24]. Most
of them focus on the gait properties captured with inertial sensors such accelerometers and/or gyroscopes mounted on-body
[11]–[13], [18]–[20], [24], extended with electroencephalography (EEG) [21] and electromyography [22]. However, in this
setting, FoG needs to take place in order to be detected. A step
further is to predict that a FoG might happen and start a preemptive rhythmical cue which will help the user to avoid altogether
the freezing episode.
Mazilu et al. [25] attempted to capture changes in gait characteristics a few seconds before FoG from accelerometers mounted
on the subject’s ankle from DAPHnet dataset [13], in order to
predict FoG. The use of body-fixed inertial measurement units
(IMU) is promising, as these sensors are unobtrusive to wear
in daily life and are already integrated in real-time systems that
detect FoG [11]–[13]. However, the findings from [25] suggest
that acceleration, although informative for some of the subjects, is limited in capturing changes in the gait just before FoG
episodes, as there are other walking-related events which disturb
the signal, such as turns.

B. FoG and Brain Activity
Handojoseno et al. [26]–[28] analyzed the dynamics of EEG
signals before and during the onset of freezing periods, observing that EEG power features might have specific patterns when
transitioning to FoG. Their aim is to achieve an early detection
of FoG from brain activity that could help patients to avoid an
impending freeze episode.
In a similar direction, Maidan et al. [29] evaluate the direct
relationship between FoG during turns and frontal lobe activity using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). The
changes in brain frontal lobe activation before and during FoG
highlight the connections between motor planning, information
processing, and FoG, suggesting that there might be distinguishable patterns in the frontal lobe activity which happen just before
FoG.
However, the continuous long-term monitoring of brain activity via EEG or fNIRS signals is not possible at the moment in
daily-life scenarios. These systems have wearability issues, are
expensive, and are not commercially available. In this study, we
search for alternatives to the IMU and sensors which capture the
brain activity, in which we can observe distinguishing patterns
before a FoG episode: ECG and SC.
C. FoG Impact on Physiological Data
Clinical studies found that apparently, there is a correlation
between freezing and stress or anxiety, showing that mental conditions play an important role in the pathogenesis of FoG [14]:
stressful situations, anxiety, depression, cognitive challenging
situations, or fatigue have been associated with gait freeze, and
might be a contributing factor [6], [15], [30].
In a recent study, Maidan et al. [31] found correlations between the HR variations during FoG, compared with periods
of walking before or just after the episode. Moreover, HR also
increased just before gait freezing. The hypothesis in the study
is that the autonomic nervous system “may be activated during
and perhaps just before FoG, reflecting a sympathetic response
that exacerbates the risk of FoG or occurs in conjunction with
FoG” [31]. The findings suggest that what is described as a sudden, episodic event actually evolves over a relatively long time,
i.e., few seconds before the episode. However, only FoG during
turns that lasted longer than 3 s were considered, and data were
analyzed only few seconds before or just after the FoG.
We take the idea in [31] forward and test whether there are
significant correlations in changes of physiological status captured by ECG and SC just before or during FoG, compared
with all the rest of walking events, such as straight line walking,
turns, and gait initiation. Different from [31], we focus on all
the FoG episodes, independent of their subtype.
D. Physiological Data for Mental State Recognition
Stress, fear, or other emotions could be detected from electrodermal activity or from ECG changes, in real-life scenarios: Wearable ECG sensors are used in monitoring the stress
arousal in the wild [16], [32], for recognition of sleep apnea [33],
and for real-time detection of cardiovascular diseases such as

MAZILU et al.: PREDICTION OF FREEZING OF GAIT IN PARKINSON’S FROM PHYSIOLOGICAL WEARABLES: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

Fig. 1. Subject wearing the system used for the data collection, with a focus
on the ECG and SC sensor systems. The ECG sensor is attached on the chest,
using two electrodes. SC data are collected using finger electrodes attached on
the index and middle fingers, and a wristband on which the Shimmer sensor is
attached using Velcro stripes.

arrhythmia [34]. Similarly, wearable electrodermal activity sensors are useful in recognizing stress or other emotions [35], and
for daily-life monitoring of bipolar disorder [17]. Schumm et al.
[36] show that fight-or-flight reflex, which relates to fear, can be
sensed using galvanic skin response (GSR) information, despite
moderate levels of physical activities. We use ECG and SC to
evaluate the correlations between FoG and the changes in these
sensor signals in order to predict FoG.
III. DATASET
To study whether ECG or SC are useful for predicting FoG,
we collected the CuPiD multimodal dataset. The CuPiD dataset
contains sensing data collected from subjects with PD who performed different walking protocols in a laboratory setting designed to provoke FoG. The customized system contains nine
IMUs attached on different parts of the body, a near-infrared
spectroscopy sensor, an ECG sensor, and an SC sensor. In this
study, we focus on the information from the last two sensors.
To collect ECG, we used Actiwave,1 which samples synchronized ECG and 3-D acceleration data. The sensor samples
ECG data at NECG = 512 Hz. For SC information, we used a
Shimmer sensor,2 with synchronized 3-D acceleration and GSR
modules. Shimmer samples both GSR and acceleration data at
NGSR = 51.2 Hz. In Fig. 1, we show the two sensors and their
on-body placement.
A. Protocol Description
Building on previous work [37], [38], we designed a set of
protocol sessions, which contain different types of motor activities that subjects were asked to perform in order to provoke
FoG. We include activities shown to increase the likelihood of
FoG, e.g., turns, passing narrow corridors, and other activities
that resemble daily life in a home setting. The protocol contains
1 www.camntech.com
2 www.shimmer-research.com

1845

the following walking tasks, listed in the order in which they
were carried out.
1) The Ziegler protocol [38] is clinically designed to provoke
FoG and includes two 360◦ turns, one 180◦ turn, and
passing through a narrow passage. It takes around 1.5 min
and is performed three times: once simple, and two times
with cognitive tests. The cognitive tasks consist from a)
carrying a glass of water while walking, and b) carrying
the glass of water while performing serial subtractions.
2) Figure eight consists in performing five times a figure
eight shape in a 3-m area. It is performed for 2 min,
twice: once simple, then with a cognitive load task, which
requires to perform serial subtractions, or to enumerate
words that start with a specific letter.
3) Straight line walking with turns: The subject walks
straight for 20 m, turns, and walks again on the opposite
direction, all this for five times. The task takes approximately 1.5 min and is performed twice: first simple, and
then by passing a narrow corridor. Sometimes, straight
line walking is performed a third time with a similar cognitive load task as in the case of Figure eight.
4) Circles: The subject walks in circles, with random 180◦
and 360◦ turns, when asked by the clinicians, for a period
of 3 min.
5) The hospital tour is a real-life session that includes approximately 10 min of random walking through the hospital’s crowded hall, which includes involuntary stops,
turns, changes of direction, using the elevator, and passing narrow spaces.
In between the walking tasks, subjects were asked to sit
and relax for periods of 30–60 s. We refer to these as baseline sessions, as data from these sessions are used as reference
for the physiological data. Apart from them, we include also
other types of nonwalking sessions during the protocol: completing questionnaires, clinical evaluations, debriefing, and sitting/standing with cognitive load, i.e., performing serial subtractions. When required, the patients were resting in-between the
sessions. The whole protocol lasts for around 1–1.5 h, which includes the walking sessions, along with the baselines, nonwalking sessions, and rest periods; the walking tasks sum around
25–30 min from the protocol.
B. FoG Annotation
For fine-grained annotation of FoG events, we deployed two
video systems to record the patient’s activity during the protocol: 1) a mobile HDR camera; and 2) a fish-eye camera. Offline, two clinicians with expertise in FoG labeled the freezing
episodes and other walking events, such as start walking or
turns. They used stopwatch annotations and the videos, which
were later synchronized with the sensors datastream. Clinicians
considered the moment of the arrested gait pattern, i.e., stop in
alternating left-right stepping, as the start of FoG, and the instant
when the patient resumed a regular gait pattern as the end of it.
The accuracy of the FoG labels is at the level of a videoframe,
i.e., 40 ms. A first clinician went over all videos and marked
the FoG episodes. All events on which the first clinician was

1846

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Categories assigned to the data: FoG represents the ground truth labels
as set by the clinicians. preFoG and postFoG are artificially set to observe
whether there are specific changes just before FoG, compare with walking. The
Walk category contains the rest of the walking and gait events in the session.

Fig. 2. FoG statistics. (a) FoG events distribution across subjects, (b) distribution of FoG subtypes, and (c) FoG-duration distribution.

not sure were transferred to a second expert clinician, who went
over them and decided whether they are FoG or not. The same
procedure was followed to determine the start/end time of a
freezing episode. A problem of the SC data is the noise resulted
when the subject is touching the electrodes. In our dataset, we
made sure such noisy events did not take place, i.e., we continuously reminded the subjects not to touch the electrodes. When
it happened, clinicians labeled these kind of events from the
videos, and we took out from the analysis the signal segments
corresponding to such periods.
C. Participants and Statistics
The study took place at the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center in Israel was approved by the medical center’s Helsinki
committee, and all subjects provided informed written consent.
We recruited participants who suffer from PD and self-reported
FoG, are cognitively intact, and have adequate vision and hearing abilities. We excluded people who suffer from psychiatric
comorbidities, e.g., major depression, or had a history of stroke,
traumatic brain injury, brain tumor, or other neurological disorders. We did not explicitly screen for heart abnormalities during
recruitment. However, during the protocol, we asked each participant if she/he suffers from any heart disorders. Only one
participant reported suffering from a heart disease and had a
pacemaker. In this case, it is likely that changes in HR that is
controlled by a pacemaker would not reflect FoG; hence, we did
not collect data for this subject.
Prior to testing, participants underwent a complete clinical
physical and neurological examination that included assessment
using the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale test UPDRSIII [39]. During the clinical protocol, all participants were in
ON medication state, i.e., medication was effective, in order to
obtain similar conditions as in daily life.
In total, 18 subjects participated in the data collection trial.
They were between 49 and 89 years of age (average: 68.9 years,
std: 10.2 years) and had a disease duration between 2 and 18
years (average: 8.8 years, std: 4.6 years). Subjects obtained

diverse scores for the PD and FoG severity: UPDRS scores between 25 and 56 (average: 41.7, std: 10.2), and FOG-Q [40]
between 4 and 30 (average: 19.7, std: 7.1), being representative
for II-IV Hoehn & Yahr disease severity [41]. Some of the patients could not perform the entire protocol, due to their disease
severity.
The updated FoG-related statistics compared with those presented in [42] are the following: a total of 184 FoG episodes
were identified, with a duration between 0.12 and 98.88 s (average: 8.84 s, std: 14.87 s). FoGs are not equally distributed among
the patients, as shown in Fig. 2(a): seven did not experience any
FoG, four had between two and six FoGs and the other seven
experienced more than ten episodes. In Fig. 2(b), we illustrate
the distribution of the FoG subtypes episodes, related to the
walking context: The majority of FoG events occurred during
or just after turning (101 out of 184), 38 of them were related
to gait initiation, and the rest of 45 occurred during walking
in straight line. The average FoG duration, FoG characteristics, and gait performance varied across subjects. A histogram
with the FoG-duration distribution is given in Fig. 2(c), approximately 65% of FoG episodes having a duration between [0, 5]
s. The relatively low number of FoG episodes, their distribution
across only 11 subjects, and their type might be explained by
the fact that subjects were in the ON medication state, which
leads to relatively improved gait performance, compared with
the OFF medication state. Moreover, FoG is much more difficult
to trigger in the clinic than in the home [43].
IV. CHANGES IN PHYSIOLOGICAL DATA FOR FOG PREDICTION:
AN EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS
A. Methodology and Features Extracted
In this first part of our contribution, we aim to answer the first
research question: Whether physiological data such as ECG and
SC have different characteristics just before, during, or just after
FoG, compared with the rest of walking events.
We analyze physiological data in the following manner: For
each of 11 subjects which experienced FoG in our study, and
for each walking session in the protocol which contains at least
one FoG, we consider the time interval TpreFoG before the FoG,
as preFoG period. Similarly, we consider the time Tp ostFoG just
after the FoG episode as the postFoG period. Thus, we split
the data in four categories, as in Fig. 3: 1) FoG represents data
during the FoG; 2) preFoG is the data from the TpreFoG period;
3) postFoG is the data from the Tp ostFoG ; and 4) Walk represents
the rest of the data in the session, which includes events such as
turns, gait initiation, and stop walking.
We set TpreFoG = Tp ostFoG = 3 s. These values are chosen a
priori as in [31]. The ECG or SC properties might change with

MAZILU et al.: PREDICTION OF FREEZING OF GAIT IN PARKINSON’S FROM PHYSIOLOGICAL WEARABLES: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

1847

TABLE I
FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM ECG SIGNAL
#

Feature

Description

1
2

HRm e a n
HRm e d i a n

3

HRV

4

PowerV L F

5

PowerL F

6

PowerH F

7

RatioL F / H F

Mean over the HR values in the window
Median over the HR values in the window
std(HR) ∗ 100
HRV =
mean(HR)
Power on very low frequencies (VLF)
[0.01, 0.04] Hz of the ECG signal
Power on low frequencies (LF)
[0.04, 0.15] Hz of the ECG signal
Power on high frequencies (HF)
[0.15, 0.4] Hz of the ECG signal
The ratio between the power on
LF and HF bands of the ECG

Fig. 4. Sequence of ECG raw signal, together with the extracted median of
HR and HRV. The sequence contains three FoG episodes, straight line walking,
and events such turns and gait initiation. Both HR and HRV increase within 3 s
before the first FoG episode, or in the 5-s interval just after the second and third
FoG event. However, these increasing trends are not present only in the vicinity
of freeze events, as HR and HRV also increase during the second turn in the
walking sequence.

less than or more than 3 s before or after each FoG. However,
we fix the pre- and post-FoG periods as a first step only to see
whether there are significant changes in the physiological data
across the four categories. Different from, and in extension to
the work from [31], we consider all the FoG episodes in the
protocol, independent of duration, or the walking context in
which they happen.
From each sensor, we extract features in a sliding-window
manner [13], [18], [25]. We set the window size to Nwindow =
3 s, and the window-overlapping step to Nstep = 0.5 s. We
choose a 3-s processing window to map on TpreFoG, and TpostFoG, as a tradeoff between achieving accurate feature estimations from sensing data, and the latency of observing variations
prior to or during FoG. Moreover, as FoG is transient and typically short, larger data windows will contain a higher proportion
of normal walking, making it more challenging to observe variations prior to freeze. On the contrary, shorter windows might
cause poorer estimations of feature values. Next, we give details

Fig. 5. SC data-processing framework: from the original RG S R collected from
Shimmer, we obtain C, C(1) , and C(2) signals, on which we apply windowing
and feature extraction techniques.
TABLE II
FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM SC AND ITS DERIVATIVES
#

Feature

1
2
3
4
5
6

Mean
Median
Std
Min
Max
Diff

7

# min

8

# max

Description
The average value over the signal
The median over the window
The standard deviation value
The minimum of the signal
The maximum value of the signal
The difference between the maximum and
minimum values of the signal
The number of local minima in the window
data vector
The number of local maxima over the same
window

about the data processing and extracted features for each of the
two sensor modalities.
1) ECG Data Processing: For each window of ECG data,
we detect the R peaks and compute the time between each two
consecutive peaks, i.e., the RR intervals [44]. We then compute
the instantaneous HR values in the window as
60 × SamplingRateECG
.
(1)
HR =
RR
We extract the mean and median of HR vector and the heart rate
variability (HRV) as defined previously in [31]. In addition to the
HR features, we extract frequency-based features from the raw
ECG [44], such as the power on different spectra. A summary
with all the ECG features and their description is contained in
Table I.
Fig. 4 contains an example of raw ECG signal, together with
HRm edian and HRV extracted features, for a walking session
which contains three FoG episodes. We observe that HR and
HRV increase just before FoG, in the case of the first episode or
just after FoG, in case of the last two FoG. However, both features also increase under the same pattern during the second turn.
2) SC Data Processing: In Fig. 5, we present the steps for
processing the SC data: Before extracting the features, we first
1) transform the galvanic skin resistance signal obtained from
the Shimmer sensor into conductance data. SC (Corig ) is the
1
. We then follow the
inverse of the skin resistance: Corig = R GSR
same processing steps for SC as in previous work [45], [46]:
2) we first apply on the Corig a third-order low-pass filter, noncausal, with a cutoff frequency of 0.9 Hz. We choose this cutoff
value empirically, as it showed the most informative changes in
the signal prior and during FoG across all subjects. Then, from
the resulted filtered signal Cﬁltered , we extract its baseline. We
refer to the resultant signal as C. 3) From C, we then extract its
first derivate C(1) , and its second derivative C(2) , by following the
same procedure as in [45] and [46]. Using the sliding window

1848

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

TABLE III
ECG-BASED FEATURES WHICH HAVE THE p-VALUE ≤ 0.001 FROM ANOVA
TEST, FOR EACH SUBJECT
#

Subject

Features

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

S01
S02
S03
S04
S05
S06
S11
S12
S16
S17
S18

HRm e a n , HRm e d i a n , HRV
HRm e a n , HRm e d i a n , PowerH F
no data available
HRV, PowerH F
HRV
HRm e a n , HRm e d i a n
–
no data available
no data available
HRm e a n , HRm e d i a n
PowerH F

Fig. 6. Sequence of straight line walking with turns, containing am FoG
episode, captured in the raw SC, C, C(1) , and C(2) signals. There are specific
changes just before FoG, different from the signals’ changes during other walking events (turns, gait initiation).

procedure, 4) we extract the following eight features for each of
the resultant signals C, C(1) , and C(2) as described in Table II. In
total, we obtain 24 features from each window (eight for each
signal: C, C(1) , C(2) ).
In Fig. 6, we show an example of raw SC data and the resulted
C, C(1) , C(2) signals, collected during straight line walking with
turns. We observe that the C and C(1) increase few seconds
before FoG. The same just after the FoG happens. Moreover,
these changes are different from the SC variations corresponding
to other walking events such as gait initiation or turns.
B. Informative Features and Statistics
To explore whether there are specific changes in the ECG
or SC during preFoG or FoG, compared with Walk, we use
1) one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and 2) mutual information (MI) values for each feature extracted, for each of the
11 subjects.
1) One-Way Analysis of Variance: We use ANOVA [47] in
MATLAB to assess the p-value for each of the features from
ECG or SC data, with respect with the four categories. Prior to
using ANOVA, we checked the normality assumption for each
ECG or SC feature, for each subject’s dataset. Not all the features are perfectly following a normal distribution; however, the
MATLAB ANOVA implementation is robust to slight deviations
from this assumption. We consider the significance threshold set
to 0.001. A feature that has the p-value ≤ 0.001 shows that the
information from at least two of the four categories of data is
statistically different, although the features selected will not be
necessarily useful in predicting FoG.

Fig. 7. Boxplot representation for HRm e d ia n , HRV, and PowerH F features,
in case of two subjects with different ECG trends related to the four categories:
In case of S05, HRV and PowerH F increase during preFoG and FoG compared
to Walk. In the case of S06, HR increases significantly during preFoG, FoG,
and postFoG periods, and PowerH F decreases during preFog.

2) Mutual Information: MI [48] is another measure we use
to check whether there is a link between the observations from a
feature related to the four categories of data, i.e., preFoG, FoG,
postFoG, and Walk. MI is usually used for feature selection [48],
but here we apply MI for feature ranking, to explore which of
the features capture differences between the four categories.
C. ECG Features
Table III presents the features which obtained a p ≤ 0.001
with ANOVA, for each of the 11 patients. In the case of three
subjects (S03, S12, and S16), we were not able to extract the
features from the raw ECG, due to the high level of noise in
the signal, likely the result of weak attachment of the electrodes
to the chest (S03 and S12), or because one subject, S16, had
a pacemaker. Results suggest that there are changes in some
features which are specific for at least one category of data,
when compared with the rest of the three categories: Thus,
either FoG, preFoG, or postFoG has specific changes in some
features, when compared with Walk category. For S11, none of
the ECG features passed the ANOVA test, suggesting that for

MAZILU et al.: PREDICTION OF FREEZING OF GAIT IN PARKINSON’S FROM PHYSIOLOGICAL WEARABLES: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

1849

TABLE IV
SC-BASED FEATURES WHICH HAVE THE p-VALUE ≤ 0.01 RESULTED FROM ANOVA1 TEST, FOR EACH SUBJECT∗
#

Subj.

C

C(1)

C(2)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

S01
S02
S03
S04
S05
S06
S11
S12
S16
S17
S18

mean, median, std, min, max, diff, # min
mean, median, std, max
std, min, # min, # max
mean, median, std, max, diff
–
mean, median, std, min, max, diff
mean, std
mean, median, std, min, max
mean, median, std, max, diff, # min, # max
mean, median, std, max, diff, # min, # max
mean, median, std, min, max

mean, median, std, min, max, # min, # max
median, std, min, max
std, min, max, # min, # max
mean, median, std, min, max, # min, # max
–
mean, median, std, diff
–
std, min, max, diff
# max
mean, median, std, min, max, # min, # max
std, min, max

std
median
std, min, max, # min, # max
median, std, min, max
–
mean, median, max, # min, # max
–
mean, std, min, max, # min, # max
–
std, min, max, diff, # min, # max
std, min, max

∗

The text-bolded features represent the top five occurred ones across all subjects.

this subject, there are no significant changes ECG with respect
to the four categories of data.
Similarly, the top MI scores were obtained by HR (mean,
median), HRV, and PowerHF features, where the HR-based and
HRV features obtained top MI scores for all subjects. PowerHF
is particularly interesting, as data in the processing 3-s window
may not be large enough for an accurate estimation of the powerbased features. Yet, the estimated PowerHF captures different
trends across the four categories.
However, we observe that for some of the subjects, the HR
values (mean, median) incorporate the significant variations,
while for other subjects, the HRV varies. Power on HF seems
to be independent of these two groups. For example, we plot
in Fig. 7 the HRm edian , HRV, and PowerHF (features which
obtained the best ANOVA p-value and MI scores across all
datasets) in case of two subjects which show three different types
of ECG behavior. In case of S05, HRV registers a higher variance
and has higher values during preFoG and FoG, compared with
Walk and postFoG periods. PowerHF varies too and has higher
values during PreFoG and FoG; however, the values tend to
overlap with those of the other two classes. For this particular
subject, HRV changes with few seconds before FoG suggests
that there is a preFoG specific pattern which can be detected. On
the other side, for S06 [see Fig. 7(b)], the relevant changes are
captured by the HR (mean, median), while HRV and PowerHF
do not incorporate any useful information. During preFoG and
FoG, and even postFoG, the HR increases compared to Walk.
Discussion: Our analysis supports and extends the previous
findings from the study of Maidan et al. [31], which show that
there are changes in the HR during FoG compared with periods
of walking before. Moreover, we generalize these findings: our
analysis suggests that there are changes in HR or HRV during
all FoG subtypes, compared with the rest of all waking. In our
dataset, only 55% of FoG are during turns (see Fig. 2(b) in
Section III), compared with the dataset from Maidan et al. [31],
which includes only FoG during turns. However, different from
[31], these changes do not follow a general trend, but are subject
dependent, at least in the case of Cupid dataset.
Due to the diverse FoG subtypes and walking events, results
suggest that ECG might capture some physiological changes
with few seconds before FoG, which could lead or be a cause

for the upcoming freeze event. In this case, ECG could be used
to predict FoG.
D. SC Features
We apply the same procedure as in case of ECG to the SC
features, to observe whether some of them capture significant
changes in the preFoG and FoG compared with Walk.
Table IV lists the features that obtained a p-value ≤ 0.001
on the ANOVA significance test, for each of the 11 subjects.
Different from the ECG, there is a higher fraction of the
24 SC features, which imply significant variations on the four
categories, suggesting that the SC captures more information
related to preFoG, FoG, and Walk periods. A higher number of
features from C signal passed the ANOVA test overall across
the subjects, compared with the first- and second-derivative features. In case of S05, no SC-based features passed the ANOVA
test, suggesting that for this patient, the SC does not capture any
significant changes during preFoG, FoG, or postFoG, compared
with the rest of walking.
The most occurred features across all subjects are the mean,
median, std, and max of the C signal, and the std feature of
the C(1) , followed by min and max of the C(1) signal. However,
the # of local minima and the # of local maxima features, for
all the three types of signals (C, C(1) , and C(2) ), were selected as
top features using MI, for all subjects.
Next, we observe how the top resulted features with both
ANOVA and MI change with respect to preFoG, FoG, and Walk.
In Fig. 8, we present the variations of some six top resulted
features from the previous experiment (mean, std, and max from
C, std of C(1) , and # min and # max from C(2) ) in boxplot
representations, for two subjects.
Fig. 8(a) shows the changes in case of S18: We observe a significant increase in the mean, std, max of C signal, and std of C(1)
during preFoG, compared with the rest of walking. Moreover,
there is a significant decrease in the # of local minima and maxima of the second-derivative signal, during preFoG, compared
with Walk. The first four features increase also for FoG and
postFoG periods, compared with the Walk. Changes in the SC
suggest that there is an increase in the SC just before the FoG,
which is different from both Walk and FoG categories. Thus, it
might be possible to predict FoG, in addition to detect it.

1850

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Boxplot representations for SC-based features—mean, std, and max of C, std of C(1) , and # local minima, and # local maxima from C(2) —in case of two
subjects with different trends during preFoG and FoG: For S18, there is a significant increase in the first four features during preFoG compared with the rest of
walking. However, for S17, there are no significant changes in any of the features during preFoG compare to Walk; still, there is a statistically significant increase
in the first four features just after FoG.

On the other side, for S17 [see Fig. 8(b)], there is a significant
variation only just after FoG: The # of local minima and maxima
from C(2) decrease, while mean, std, max from C, and std from
C(1) increase in postFoG. However, preFoG and Walk values for
all the features tend to be similar. This suggests that changes in
SC depict a physiological reaction of the actual FoG, and not its
cause.
Similar to ECG, for both subjects, we observe a quite high
number of outlier values for all the four categories of data. This
is due to the a priori durations of preFoG and postFoG periods,
which are set both to 3 s just before and after FoG. However,
a preFoG or postFoG behavior can be longer with few more
seconds than the fixed set period. Thus, the preFoG, postFoG,
and Walk share values.
Discussion: We conclude that even if the SC data capture
more statistically relevant information about the preFoG and
FoG compared with Walk (suggested also by the high ratio of
total features which pass ANOVA), still each subject tends to
have a specific reaction; thus, significant changes in SC before
FoG are subject-dependent. It is natural, as each person has a
specific reaction to external stimuli, thus also the reaction in the
captured SC is person-specific.
Moreover, SC is not prone to the noise from the subject’s
movements, thus the explanation why SC seems to capture more
changes than the ECG data during preFoG and FoG periods.
SC might incorporate noise generated from touching the
electrodes. As mentioned earlier in Section III, we made sure
to avoid such events taking place by continuously reminding
subjects not to touch the electrodes. In case it happened, clinicians labeled the events from the videos, and we took out from
the analysis the signal segments corresponding to such periods.
V. PREDICTION OF FOG EVENTS
In the previous section, we found initial evidences that there
might be specific changes in the physiological signals, particularly in the SC, just before FoG episodes. These changes are

subject-dependent, as each individual has its own way to act to
stimuli, and as a result, the physiological answer captured by
ECG and SC data is specific for each person. Following the previous findings, in this section, we answer the second research
question: Can we predict FoG from physiological signals?
For this, we model FoG prediction as an anomaly detection
problem. The reasoning behind is that FoG events are themselves
anomalies during walking, which happen rarely relative to the
total walking period. This maps exactly on the definition of the
anomaly in a dataset. Furthermore, we consider also changes in
the signal during just before FoG as an anomaly in the signal,
together with the FoG. By detecting these variations prior to
FoG, we actually predict the forthcoming freeze episode.
To solve FoG prediction problem, we use multivariate Gaussian distribution (MGD) [49]. MGD was successfully used for
anomaly detection with image data [50]. Moreover, MGD allows for multiple and different time-series fusion, being suitable
for our different features from ECG or SC, which capture themselves various changes in the data. We build a FoG prediction
model for each of the 11 subjects, as ECG and SC data changes
and reactions are specific for each person.
A. FoG-Prediction Model
We consider the vector of features for each subject S, as
vector-valued random variable X = [X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk ]T , where
the k columns represent the features, resulted either from ECG
signal, or from SC signal, as detailed in the previous section. We make the hypothesis that values from X are normally
distributed. A line in X represents a feature vector, as computed
from a window of data. We define μ ∈ Rk as the mean of X, and
Σ as its positive semidefinite covariance matrix. We compute
the MGD, or the probability density function p as


1
1
T −1
p(x; μ, Σ) =
− (x − μ) Σ (x − μ)
1 exp
k
2
(2π) 2 | Σ | 2
(2)

MAZILU et al.: PREDICTION OF FREEZING OF GAIT IN PARKINSON’S FROM PHYSIOLOGICAL WEARABLES: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

where the resulted p(x; μ, Σ) is a vector with the same length
as the matrix of observations (features) X. We then apply on p
that resulted from all the data of one subject a threshold based
rule: We consider the resultant vector of anomalies Labelanomaly ,
with decisions for each line in X, as
Labelanomaly = p(x; μ, Σ) ≤ TH

(3)

where TH represents the threshold value.
A cross-validation scheme with training and testing data to
automatically model μ and Σ, and select the threshold TH,
implies that data are labeled with the anomaly events. Thus,
there are available ground truth labels for periods before FoG,
FoG, and after FoG. But in our case, ground truth labels provided
by clinicians target only the FoG events, while preFoG and
postFoG categories are a priori considered and fixed to a period
of 3 s. The preFoG anomaly in the physiological data might start
before or after this fixed and artificially set period. As a result,
we cannot model the parameters using cross validation, as there
are no ground truth labels for the anomaly we want to detect,
i.e., preFoG. Hence, we compute the μ and Σ on the whole data
and set manually the TH value.
B. Evaluation
We apply the method detailed above on the data from each of
the 11 subjects who experienced FoG, in the case of two types
of data: 1) ECG, and 2) SC.
We consider the following performance measures: The
number of true positives (TP) events, defined as the number of successfully predicted FoG from the total number of
FoG for a subject dataset. We consider a FoG detected in advance/predicted when the Labelanomaly outputs continuously that
there is an anomaly in the data with at most 8 s before a FoG
episode. The false positive (FP) events are the number of false
FoG predictions, i.e., the method predicts a FoG, when none
happens. Additionally, we compute the average prediction time
Tprediction across the successfully predicted FoG, which shows
how much time on average a FoG is predicted, for each subject.
The proposed algorithm detects also FoG, showing whether
there is an anomaly during or just after the FoG period. However,
we do not present the evaluation results for the FoG detection,
as it is beyond the scope of our work.
C. Results
1) Prediction of FoG From ECG data: We were not able
to build a FoG-prediction model from ECG data. Even if the
analysis from the previous section suggested that ECG might
be useful in predicting FoG, it seems that the variations of the
features were not containing enough information to build the
anomaly model.
One explanation is that changes in the ECG features might
not be only correlated with FoG, but could come also from the
noise captured by the ECG from the sudden movement of the
body during different walking events, i.e., the torso movement
during turns.
2) Prediction of FoG From SC data: Table V presents the
FoG-prediction performances for each of the subjects’ datasets,

1851

TABLE V
FOG-PREDICTION PERFORMANCES
#

Subject

#TP / # total (%)

#FP

Avg. pred. time (s)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

S01
S02
S03
S04
S05
S06
S11
S12
S16
S17
S18

12 /19 (63.1%)
9 /11 (81.8%)
21 /22 (95.4%)
2 /2 (100%)
2 /4 (50%)
23 /37 (62.16% )
4 /4 (100%)
20 /27 (74%)
14 / 24 (58%)
16 /28 (57.1%)
6 /6 (100%)

11
5
6
1
5
8
1
6
5
18
1

5.7
6.3
3.7
4
5.2
4.2
1.5
3.6
3.6
4.3
4.5

Total

132 /184 (71.3%)

71

4.2

when using features from SC. Data from SC are informative
enough to predict 71.3% of FoG episodes (overall 132 out of
184 events) across the 11 subjects, with an average prediction
time of 4.2 s before the freeze event. Moreover, the prediction
rate comes with a relatively low number of false predictions
(71 false alarms across approximately 2 h of data). The selected
thresholds TH for each subject data are chosen to be slightly
in the favor of increasing the number of FoG detected, while
keeping a low number of false positives. These results suggest
that it is feasible to use changes in the SC signal during walking
to predict FoG episodes in real time. There might be a subject
specific pattern in the SC signal, which happens before the
FoG, which is accurate enough to distinguish between the other
walking patterns, given the low number of false alarms.
Two types of reactions: The specific variations in SC prior
to FoG episodes are a result of the body’s reaction to stimuli,
which are likely a factor that leads to FoG, as hypothesized in
[14]. However, as suggested also in the previous section, SC
is not equally informative for all the subjects. The prediction
results across the subjects are strongly correlated with the statistical significance of the changes obtained by the SC features.
In the previous section, we observed that there are two types of
reactions in the SC: In the first one, SC features increased before FoG; thus, we could capture changes in the physiological
signal that might provoke FoG, making possible FoG prediction. Subjects such as S02, S03, S04, S11, S18, and even S12
and S16 seem to have this kind of behavior. This is suggested
by the high number of FoG predicted (up to 100% for S04,
S11, and S18), at a cost of a relatively low number of false
positives.
On the other side, a second type of reaction is that SC increases only toward the end of FoG, or after the event. Sometimes, the SC does not capture any reaction even after FoG.
Subjects such as S01, S05, S06, and S17 are included in this
category. For these datasets, the number of FoG predictions
comes at a high number of false positives, when compared to
the total number of FoG events to be predicted. For example,
in case of S05, there are four events to predict, but predicting
two of them comes at the cost of 5 additional false alarms. This
suggests that the reaction of the sympathetic nervous system
captured by SC data might be an answer to the actual FoG. For

1852

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

some subjects here, sometimes, the prediction of a FoG might
be actually the late detection of a reaction caused by a previous
FoG: For example, in case of S06 or S17, in some walking sessions, the FoG events were happening in a chain reaction, with
few seconds between them. In this case, the changes in the SC
captured as a result of a FoG could be used to predict the next
FoG.
However, even for this reaction type, the SC changes are
useful, as the future FoG events might be the result of the answer
to the first FoG, i.e., stress or anxiety due to FoG. In this case,
a preemptive cueing for overcoming FoG would be helpful to
stop the FoG reaction chain.
FoG prediction time: For all subjects, we observe that the algorithm detected an anomalous trend in SC data seconds before
the actual FoG event (average of 4.2 s, min 1.5 s, and max 6.3
s), for the successfully predicted events. This finding suggests,
as also stated in [31], that what was supposed to be a sudden, episodic freezing event actually evolves over a relatively
long time, i.e., few seconds. Moreover, this prediction time, i.e.,
4–5 s, enables the idea of giving rhythmic cueing to prevent
the patient from entering the eventual freeze episode: starting a
rhythmic auditory stimulation few seconds before gives time to
the subject to react to the cue, and follow the imposed rhythm,
which would help regain the gait rhythmicity and avoid the FoG.
A lower prediction time, e.g., ≤ 1 s, would not be useful, as the
subject will not have time to react to cueing.
Correlation with PD scores: We were not able to find any
correlation between the FoG-prediction performances, and the
PD disease duration, FoG-Q score, Hoehn & Yahr score of
UPDRS-III score for each subject. This suggests that the reactions captured in the SC are not related to PD disease stage,
but are related to how the sympathetic nervous system reacts to
psychological arousal. This reaction is independent of disease
severity, at least as captured using conventional measures, and
appears to be specific to how each subject reacts to stress or
anxiety.
Prediction and FoG subtypes: Only 55% of FoG happened
during turns (see Fig. 2(c) from Section III), while more than
71% from the total FoG were successfully predicted. This suggests that the changes in SC prior to FoG are only capturing
reactions to stimuli which cause FoG and are independent of
the FoG subtypes or walking context. As a result, it is possible
to predict even FoG during gait initiation. As a comparison, with
accelerometers, FoG during gait initiation cannot be detected, as
there are no prior information about the gait [25]. Moreover, different from ECG, SC data are not prone to noise coming from
the movement type, such as sudden body movements during
turns or start walking.
Prediction versus detection: Our method also detects FoG
(during and just after the event detection), on top of the prediction. This is due to the general framework of the algorithm
for anomaly detection. In our case, anomalous changes in the
SC data are not only before FoG, but also during and just after
FoG, as also shown in Section IV. Thus, in case if the FoG is not
predicted, then it can be detected, either with the same anomalydetection algorithm and SC data, or with previous methods based
on ankle-mounted accelerometers [12].

VI. VISION OF A WEARABLE SYSTEM TO PREDICT FOG IN
REAL TIME
The high-rate prediction of FoG and the quite low number of
false positives are promising toward a real-time FoG-prediction
system based on SC data, which will act like a personal assistant
for overcoming FoG in real-life settings, such as the users’
homes.
We envision a system composed from a smartphone as a
wearable computer, which receives data in real-time from an SC
wearable sensor. There are commercial wrist mounted sensors,
such as wrist bracelets, which sense SC-related data, such as
GSR. The wrist-worn bracelet sensors do not need additional
finger electrodes; thus, there will not be any noise in the SC
from touching the sensor.
In our present work, we predict the FoG episodes, but our
study is done offline. However, our algorithm could be implemented and adapted on a smartphone, which receives and
analyzes the sensor data in real time. Once the algorithm detects
an anomaly, thus predicting that a FoG might happen in the next
few seconds, the system will start a preemptive rhythmic auditory cue similar as in [12], which will help the subject improve
the gait and maybe overcome the FoG.
A main conclusion of our study is that the reactions in SC
before FoG are subject-specific; thus, the algorithm thresholds
need to be set dependent on each subject data variations. In case
of the FoG-prediction assistant, the algorithm threshold can be
set during the first setup of the system. Before using the system,
the patients need in any case to undergo a clinical evaluation
and test the system for the first time in a lab setting. The SC
data gathered during this consult and the clinician’s gait-related
observations will be used to set a user-personalized threshold
for the prediction algorithm.
The system can have an additional wearable accelerometer
sensor as in [12], so that in case a FoG is not predicted, the
system at least can detect and start cueing upon FoG. Moreover,
sensing data and the algorithm decision output collected during
system’s usage can be also sent to a telemedicine system, for
long-term monitoring of patient’s gait.

VII. CONCLUSION
We propose the use of new sensor modalities to continuously
monitor the gait anomalies in PD, in particular FoG episodes.
We suggest that FoG can be predicted before it happens by
means of physiological data, namely ECG and SC.
In a first stage, we show through a statistical analysis that
there are physiological features exhibiting significant changes
across different phases that patients go through, i.e., walking,
right before FoG, during FoG and after FoG. However, features
incorporating the useful information are subject-dependent, as
each of them react differently to stimuli. Subsequently, we deployed an anomaly-based algorithm to predict FoG and SC information. We created patient-specific models by fitting MGDs
on data from each subject. The anomaly-based models allowed
to predict 71.3% of all 184 FoG episodes, on average 4.2 s
before a FoG occurred.

MAZILU et al.: PREDICTION OF FREEZING OF GAIT IN PARKINSON’S FROM PHYSIOLOGICAL WEARABLES: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

Our findings also enable technologies for a real-life system
that could help subjects to avoid FoG episodes altogether, by
starting rhythmical cueing in real time when users are have a
high risk of having a FoG episode. A practical system would
consist of a bracelet measuring SC to predict FoG, an optional
ankle-mounted accelerometer to enhance FoG detection, and a
smartphone for real-time data processing. Such systems offer
the possibility of continuous gait monitoring and management
in out-of-the-lab settings and could act like gait assistants, which
help the users to avoid the FoG episodes and maintain the gait.
In addition to reducing the FoG incidence, the system would
contribute to increasing the quality of life in PD.
Future work should analyze the effect of FoG-prediction and
the start of rhythmical cueing during such situations on the gait
performance in PD, both on short-term and long-term periods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank I. Maidan for support with
data collection, and D. Roggen for his valuable advice.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Muangpaisan, A. Mathews, H. Hori, and D. Seidel, “A systematic
review of the worldwide prevalence and incidence of Parkinson’s disease,”
J. Med. Assoc. Thailand, vol. 94, pp. 749–755, 2011.
[2] M. Macht, Y. Kaussner, J. Möller, K. Stiasny-Kolster, K. Eggert, H.-P.
Krüger, and H. Ellgring, “Predictors of freezing in Parkinson’s disease:
A survey predictors of freezing in Parkinson’s disease: A survey of 6,620
patients,” Movement Disorders, vol. 22, pp. 953–956, 2007.
[3] J. G. Nutt, B. R. Bloem, N. Giladi, M. Hallett, F. B. Horak, and
A. Nieuwboer, “Freezing of gait: Moving forward on a mysterious clinical
phenomenon,” Lancet Neurolol., vol. 10, pp. 734–744, 2011.
[4] B. R. Bloem, J. M. Hausdorff, J. Visser, and N. Giladi, “Falls and freezing
of gait in Parkinson’s disease: A review of two interconnected, episodic
phenomena,” Movement Disorders, vol. 19, pp. 871–884, 2004.
[5] P. Gray and K. Hildebrand, “Fall risk factors in Parkinson’s disease,” J.
Neurosci. Nursing, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 222–228, 2000.
[6] C. Walton, J. Shine, J. Hall, C. O’Callaghan, L. Mowszowski, M. Gilat,
J. Szeto, S. Naismith, and S. Lewis, “The major impact of freezing of
gait on quality of life in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurol., vol. 262, no. 1,
pp. 108–115, 2015.
[7] O. Moore, C. Peretz, and N. Giladi, “Freezing of gait affects quality of life
of peoples with Parkinson’s disease beyond its relationships with mobility
and gait,” Movement Disorders, vol. 22, pp. 2192–2195, 2007.
[8] M. Suteerawattananon, G. Morris, B. Etnyre, J. Jankovic, and E. J. Protas,
“Effects of visual and auditory cues on gait in individuals with Parkinson’s
disease,” J. Neurol Sci., vol. 19, pp. 63–69, 2004.
[9] A. Nieuwboer, G. Kwakkel, L. Rochester, D. Jones, E. van Wegen,
A. Willems, F. Chavret, V. Hetherington, K. Baker, and I. Lim, “Cueing training in the home improves gait-related mobility in Parkinson’s
disease: The RESCUE trial,” J. Neurol., Neurosurgery Psychiatry, vol.
78, no. 2, pp. 134–140, 2007.
[10] S. Donovan, C. Lim, N. Diaz, N. Browner, P. Rose, L. Sudarsky, D. Tarsy,
S. Fahn, and D. Simon, “Laserlight cues for gait freezing in Parkinson’s
disease: an open-label study,” Parkinsonism Related Disorders, vol. 17,
pp. 240–245, 2011.
[11] E. Jovanov, E. Wang, L. Verhagen, M. Fredrickson, and R. Fratangelo,
“deFOG: A real time system for detection and unfreezing of gait of Parkinson’s patients,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009,
pp. 5151–5154.
[12] S. Mazilu, U. Blanke, M. Hardegger, G. Tröster, E. Gazit, and J. Hausdorff, “Gaitassist: A daily-life support and training system for Parkinson’s
disease patients with freezing of gait,” in Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human
Factors Comput. Syst., 2014, pp. 2531–2540.
[13] M. Bächlin, M. Plotnik, D. Roggen, I. Maidan, J. M. Hausdorff, N. Giladi,
and G. Tröster, “Wearable assistant for Parkinson’s disease patients with
the freezing of gait symptom,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 436–446, Mar. 2010.

1853

[14] N. Giladi and J. Hausdorff, “The role of mental function in the pathogenesis of freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurol. Sci., vol. 248,
pp. 173–176, 2006.
[15] S. Rahman, H. J. Griffin, N. P. Quinn, and M. Jahanshahi, “The factors that
induce or overcome freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease,” Behavioural
Neurol., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 127–136, 2008.
[16] M. Kusserow, O. Amft, and G. Tröster, “Monitoring stress arousal in the
wild,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 28–37, Apr.–Jun. 2013.
[17] C. Kappeler-Setz, F. Gravenhorst, J. Schumm, B. Arnrich, and G. Tröster,
“Towards long term monitoring of electrodermal activity in daily life,”
Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 261–271, 2013.
[18] E. Tripoliti, A. Tzallas, M. Tsipouras, G. Rigas, P. Bougia, M. Leontiou, S. Konitsiotis, M. Chondrogiorgi, S. Tsouli, and D. Fotiadis, “Automatic detection of freezing of gait events in patients with Parkinson’s
disease,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 12–26,
2013.
[19] M. Djurić-Jovičić, N. Jovičić, I. Milovanović, S. Radovanović, N. Kresojević, and M. Popović, “Classification of walking patterns in Parkinson’s
disease patients based on inertial sensor data,” in Proc. 10th Symp. Neural
Netw. Appl. Elect. Eng., 2010, pp. 3–6.
[20] K. Niazmand, K. Tonn, Y. Zhao, U. Fietzek, F. Schroeteler, K. Ziegler,
A. Ceballos-Baumann, and T. Lueth, “Freezing of gait detection in Parkinson’s disease using accelerometer based smart clothes,” in Proc. Biomed.
Circuits Syst. Conf., 2011, pp. 201–204.
[21] A. Handojoseno, J. M. Shine, T. N. Nguyen et al., “The detection of
freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease patients using EEG signals based
on wavelet decomposition,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 69–72.
[22] B. Cole, S. Roy, and S. Nawab, “Detecting freezing of gait during unscripted and unconstrained activity,” in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 5649–5652.
[23] Y. Zhao, K. Tonn, K. Niazmand, U. Fietzek, L. D’Angelo, A. CeballosBaumann, and T. Lueth, “Online FOG identification in Parkinson’s disease
with a time-frequency combined algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Biomed. Health Informat., 2012, pp. 192–195.
[24] C. Azevedo Coste, B. Sijobert, R. Pissard-Gibollet, M. Pasquier, B. Espinau, and C. Geny, “Detection of freezing of gait in parkinson disease:
Preliminary results,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 6819–6827, 2014.
[25] S. Mazilu, A. Calatroni, E. Gazit, D. Roggen, J. M. Hausdorff, and
G. Tröster, “Feature learning for detection and prediction of freezing
of gait in Parkinson’s disease,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Mach. Learning
Data Mining Pattern Recog., 2013, pp. 144–158.
[26] J. Shine, A. Handojoseno, T. Nguyen, Y. Tran, S. Naismith, H. Nguyen,
and S. Lewis, “Abnormal patterns of theta frequency oscillations during
the temporal evolution of freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease,” Clinical
Neurophysiol., vol. 125, no. 3, pp. 569–576, 2014.
[27] A. Handojoseno, J. Shine, T. Nguyen, Y. Tran, S. Lewis, and H. Nguyen,
“Analysis and prediction of the freezing of gait using EEG brain dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., 2014, early access.
[28] A. Handojoseno, J. M. Shine, M. Gilat, T. N. Nguyen, Y. Tran, S. J. Lewis,
and H. T. Nguyen, “Prediction of freezing of gait using analysis of brain
effective connectivity,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 4119–4122.
[29] I. Maidan, H. Bernad-Elarazi, E. Gazit, N. Giladi, J. Hausdorff, and
A. Mirelman, “Changes in oxygenated hemoglobin link freezing of gait to
frontal activation in patients with parkinson disease: An fNIRS study of
transient motor-cognitive failures,” J. Neurology, vol. 262, pp. 899–908,
2015.
[30] J. Vandenbossche, N. Deroost, E. Soetens, J. Spildooren, S. Vercruysse,
A. Nieuwboer, and E. Kerckhofs, “Freezing of gait in Parkinson disease
is associated with impaired conflict resolution,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair., vol. 25, pp. 765–773, 2011.
[31] I. Maidan, M. Plotnik, A. Mirelman, A. Weiss, N. Giladi, and J. Hausdorff,
“Heart rate changes during Freezing of Gait in patients with Parkinson’s
disease,” Movement Disorders, vol. 25, no. 14, pp. 2346–2354, 2010.
[32] M. Kusserow, O. Amft, and G. Tröster, “Modeling arousal phases in daily
living using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans. Affective Comput., vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 93–105, Jan–Mar. 2013.
[33] A. Khandoker, M. Palaniswami, and C. Karmakar, “Support vector machines for automated recognition of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
from ECG recordings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 37–48, Jan. 2009.
[34] S. Hu, Z. Shao, and J. Tan, “A real-time cardiac arrhythmia classification
system with wearable electrocardiogram,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Body Sensor
Netw., 2011, pp. 119–124.

1854

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

[35] C. Setz, B. Arnrich, J. Schumm, R. La Marca, G. Tröster, and U. Ehlert,
“Discriminating stress from cognitive load using a wearable EDA device,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 410–417, Mar. 2010.
[36] J. Schumm, M. Bächlin, C. Kappeler-Setz, B. Arnrich, D. Roggen, and
G. Tröster, “Effect of movements on the electrodermal response after a
startle event,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 186–191, 2008.
[37] J. Schaafsma, Y. Balash, T. Gurevich, A. Bartels, J. Hausdorff, and
N. Giladi, “Characterization of freezing of gait subtypes and the response
of each to levodopa in Parkinson’s disease,” Eur. J. Neurol., vol. 10, pp.
391–398, 2003.
[38] K. Ziegler, F. Schroeteler, A. Ceballos-Baumann, and U. Fietzek, “A new
rating instrument to assess festination and freezing gait in Parkinsonian
patients,” Movement Disorders, vol. 25, pp. 1012–1018, 2010.
[39] C. G. Goetz, B. C. Tilley, S. R. Shaftman, G. T. Stebbins, S. Fahn,
P. Martinez-Martin, W. Poewe, C. Sampaio, M. B. Stern, R. Dodel, B.
Dubois, R. Holloway, J. Jankovic, J. Kulisevsky, A. E. Lang, A. Lees, S.
Leurgans, P. A. LeWitt, D. Nyenhuis, C. W. Olanow, O. Rascol, A. Schrag,
J. A. Teresi, J. J. van Hilten, N. LaPelle, and Movement Disorder Society
UPDRS Revision Task Force, “Movement Disorder Society-sponsored
revision of the unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale (MDS-UPDRS):
Scale presentation and clinimetric testing results,” Movement Disorders,
vol. 23, pp. 2129–2170, 2008.
[40] N. Giladi, J. Tal, T. Azulay, O. Rascol, D. Brooks, E. Melamed, W. Oertel,
W. Poewe, F. Stocchi, and E. Tolosa, “Validation of the freezing of gait
questionnaire in patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Movement Disorders,
vol. 24, pp. 655–661, 2009.
[41] M. Hoehn and M. Yahr, “Parkinsonism: Onset, progression and mortality,”
Neurology, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 427–442, 1967.
[42] S. Mazilu, E. Gazit, U. Blanke, D. Roggen, J. M. Hausdorff, and G. Tröster,
“Engineers meet clinicians: Augmenting Parkinson’s disease patients to
gather information for gait rehabilitation,” in Proc. 4th Augmented Human
Int. Conf., 2013, pp. 124–127.
[43] A. Nieuwboer and N. Giladi, “The challenge of evaluating freezing of
gait in Parkinson’s disease,” Brain J. Neurosurgery, vol. 22, pp. S16–S18,
2008.
[44] G. Clifford, F. Azuaje, and P. McSharry, Advanced Methods and Tools for
ECG Data Analysis. Norwood, MA, USA: Artech House, 2006.
[45] J. Wagner, K. Jonghwa, and E. Andre, “From physiological signals to
emotions: Implementing and comparing selected methods for feature extraction and classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo.,
2005, pp. 940–943.
[46] F. Gravenhorst, A. Muaremi, G. Tröster, B. Arnrich, and A. Gruenerbl,
“Towards a mobile galvanic skin response measurement system for mentally disordered patients,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Body Area Netw., 2013,
pp. 432–435.
[47] D. Howell, Statistical Methods for Psychology. Boston, MA, USA: Cengage Learning, 2012.
[48] H. Peng, F. Long, and C. Ding, “Feature selection based on mutual information criteria of max-dependency, max-relevance, and minredundancy,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 27, no. 8,
pp. 1226–1238, Aug. 2005.
[49] N. Goodman, “Statistical analysis based on a certain multivariate complex
Gaussian distribution (an introduction),” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 34, pp.
152–177, 1963.
[50] G. Hazel, “Multivariate gaussian MRF for multispectral scene segmentation and anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing,
vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1199–1211, May 2000.

Sinziana Mazilu received the Engineering and M.Sc.
degrees in computer science and information technology from the Politehnica University of Bucharest,
Bucureşti, Romania, in 2009 and 2011, respectively.
She joined the Electronics Laboratory at ETH
Zürich, Switzerland, as Research Assistant in
2011. Her research interests include the intersection of wearable computing for healthcare, human–
computer interaction, applied machine learning, and
multimodal context recognition from on-body sensors.

Alberto Calatroni received the M.Sc. degree in electronic engineering from the Politecnico di Milano,
Milano, Italy, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree from
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, in 2013.
He conducted research on loudspeaker and microphone arrays at Politecnico di Milano until 2009.
His research in the Wearable Computing Laboratory at ETH Zürich was focused on dynamic adaptation and autonomous evolution in context recognition systems. He is currently a Senior Researcher at
ETH Zürich and co-founder of a spin off company
producing sensor technologies.

Eran Gazit received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees
in electrical engineering and the M.Sc. degree in
biomedical engineering from Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel.
Since 2011, he has been working as an engineer at
the Center for the study of Movement, Cognition and
Mobility at the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Israel. His research interests include the development
of algorithms to improve the assessment and treatment of movement in Parkinson..s disease subjects
and older adults.

Anat Mirelman received her degree in physical therapy from Ben Gurion University in Israel. In 2007,
she completed a Ph.D. focused on the use of technology for treatment of gait disorders. She is Senior Lecturer in the Department of Neurology at Tel
Aviv University, and Associate Director of the Center
for the study of Movement, Cognition and Mobility
(CMCM) at Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center. She
is investigating gait in Parkinson’s disease and aging,
focusing on real-time neural imaging of gait using
functional Near InfraRed Spectroscopy (fNIRS), and
on motor-cognitive interference.

Jeffrey M. Hausdorff received the M.S.M.E. degree
from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
Cambridge, UK, and the Ph.D. degree from Boston
University, Boston, MA, USA.
Currently, he is the Director of the Center for
the Study of Movement, Cognition, and Mobility, Tel
Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, and
a Professor in the Department of Physical Therapy,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, and in the Sagol School
of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv. His
research team investigates gait, balance, motor control, and motor-cognitive interactions in health and disease and develops new
methods for monitoring and enhancing mobility and for reducing fall risk.

Gerhard Tröster studied electrical engineering in
Darmstadt and Karlsruhe, Germany, and received the
Doctorate degree in the design of analog integrated
circuits from the Technical University of Darmstadt,
Darmstadt, in 1984.
For eight years, he was at Telefunken (Atmel)
Heilbronn, where he headed various national and international research projects centered on the key components for ISDN and digital mobile phones. Since
1993, he has been a Full Professor with the ETH
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, and directs the Electronics Laboratory. In 1997, he co-founded the spin-off u-blox AG. His research
interests include wearable computing for healthcare, wireless sensor networks,
and smart textiles applying flexible and organic electronics.

