IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

581

Flexible Epineural Strip Electrode for Recording
in Fine Nerves
Sanghoon Lee, Shih-Cheng Yen, Swathi Sheshadri, Ignacio Delgado-Martinez, Ning Xue, Zhuolin Xiang,
Nitish V. Thakor, Fellow, IEEE, and Chengkuo Lee∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper demonstrates flexible epineural strip electrodes (FLESE) for recording from small nerves. Small stripshaped FLESE enables us to easily and closely stick on various
sized nerves for less damage in a nerve and optimal recording
quality. In addition, in order to enhance the neural interface, the
gold electrode contacts were coated with carbon nanotubes, which
reduced the impedance of the electrodes. We used the FLESEs to
record electrically elicited nerve signals (compound neural action
potentials) from the sciatic nerve in rats. Bipolar and differential
bipolar configurations for the recording were investigated to optimize the recording configuration of the FLESEs. The successful
results from differential bipolar recordings showed that the total
length of FLESEs could be further reduced, maintaining the maximum recording ability, which would be beneficial for recording
in very fine nerves. Our results demonstrate that new concept of
FLESEs could play an important role in electroceuticals in near
future.
Index Terms—Bipolar configuration, carbon nanotube (CNT),
flexible neural electrodes, neural signal recording, polyimide.

I. INTRODUCTION
GROWING field of electrophysiology research involves
finding a reliable way to record tiny neural signals that
travel through peripheral nerves or for selective stimulation of
these nerves. For instance, bionic limbs may be controlled by
using recordings from motor nerves in the peripheral nervous
system (PNS), and sensory feedback can then/subsequently be
provided by stimulating the sensory nerves [1]. Other emerging
applications include achieving therapeutic effects that control
chronic diseases through the modulation of electrical signaling patterns in visceral nerves to affect organ systems. This
emerging field has been called “electroceuticals” wherein the

A

Manuscript received April 16, 2015; revised July 18, 2015; accepted July
29, 2015. Date of publication August 11, 2015; date of current version February 16, 2016. This work was supported by grants from the National Research
Foundation CRP Project “Peripheral Nerve Prostheses: A Paradigm Shift in
Restoring Dexterous Limb Function” (R-719-000-001-281). Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
S. Lee, S-C. Yen, S. Sheshadri, and Z. Xiang are with the Singapore Institute
for Neurotechnology, National University of Singapore.
I. Delgado-Martinez was with the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology,
University of Singapore. He is now with the Institute of Neurosciences, Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona and CIBERNED.
N. Xue is with the Institute of Microelectronics, Agency for Science, Technology and Research.
N. V. Thakor is with the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, National
University of Singapore, and also with the Johns Hopkins University.
∗ C. Lee is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and
the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, National University of Singapore,
117456 Singapore (e-mail: elelc@nus.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2466442

functional stimulation of visceral nerves, such as phrenic nerve
and vagus nerve for treating bladder dysfunctions cardiac or
enteric control, respectively [2]–[5]. Accordingly, the bidirectional control of the PNS will be at the center of these advances.
Due to many physiological and anatomical difficulties to access
small nerves, however, the precision acquisition and modulation
of electrical signal in PNS has proven to be a challenge. Accordingly, various types of neural electrodes have been reported in
the past, such as extraneural (Cuff, FINE) [6]–[9], intrafascicular
(LIFE and TIME) [10]–[12] penetrating (USEA) [13]–[15], and
regenerative electrodes (SIEVE) [16]–[22]. These electrodes reveal the tradeoffs between high selectivity and low invasiveness.
Even though LIFE and TIME show a higher level of selectivity
for stimulation by implantation inside nerves, the intrafascicular approach itself can potentially cause nerve damage [23]. On
the other hand, extraneural electrodes, such as a spiral cuff and
FINE show effective selectivity for stimulation that is similar to
acute trials with intrafascicular electrodes [9]. When it comes
to recording, however, the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is a
major challenge of the cuff-type electrodes, since tight cuff for
achieving close contact to a nerve causes eventual nerve damage
[6]. In addition, a long length (at least 20 mm) of cuff is usually
required for recording high-amplitude signal when tripolar configuration of recording is used [24]. There are limitations of this
long-length cuff type: 1) increasing foreign body response exposing longer areas of interfaces between a device and a nerve,
which results in changing the functionality of implanted electrodes, such as changes in signal to SNR and decreases in the
selectivity [25]; 2) unstable and unreliable device performance
due to biomechanical issues resulting from contraction and expansion of the near muscles as a result of relevant movements
[26]; 3) difficulty of implanting in very fine nerves that are
close to visceral organs and dense tissue networks providing
limited surgical and implantation space. Some solutions, such
as parylene-based new cuff designs have been proposed for flexible and conformable contact on nerves [27], [28], there is still
challenge in applying these to very fine nerves (50–200 μm),
such as branches of sciatic nerve, splanchnic, bladder, and vagus nerves that are currently getting attention for bioelectronic
medicine. Therefore, developing new electrode design concepts
is still desirable for advanced neural electrodes.
This paper proposes a flexible epineural strip electrode
(FLESE) that closely sticks to a nerve without undue pressure.
The FLESE has small size of strip-shaped body with three electrodes, which allows placing it longitudinally on various sizes
of nerves, very much like band aid. Flexible and biocompatible polyimide is used as a body material. In addition, the three

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 1. Pictures of (a) FLESE#1 and (b) FLESE#2. Yellow circles indicate suturing holes for implantation on nerves. Schematic diagrams of configuration of
implantations on a nerve, respectively, (c) FLESE#1 with a concentric bipolar electrode, and (d) FLESE#2 with a hook electrode.

sensing electrode metal contacts are coated with carbon nanotube (CNT) in order to reduce the interfacial impedance, as
well as to improve the adhesion properties [29]–[34]. Electrically elicited neural signals, elicited by different stimulation
electrodes, are recorded by different two designs of FLESEs
from main sciatic nerves of rats in order to investigate the feasibility of FLESEs.
II. METHODS
A. Device Design
The FESEs have very small strip-shaped body fabricated from
flexible and biocompatible polyimide. This design enables a
longitudinal implant on various sizes of thin nerves in a manner
analogous to attaching a band aid. This novel design reduces
significant nerve damage by just attaching the electrode to the
nerve instead of wrapping or penetrating the nerve, while providing direct contact between the nerve and the metal sensors.
Another advantage is that the various nerve sizes have little effect on the size of the electrode; in contrast, for a cuff electrode,
the inner diameter of a nerve cuff has to be closely matched to
the size of the nerve. Thus, the FLESE design allows implanting on very fine nerves with 100 s of micrometer diameter. The
electrode has a smooth geometry that prevents nerve trauma
from sharp edges. Two different designs are investigated. Both
have three sensing electrodes, where the diameter is 100 μm
and each distance between the electrodes is 3 mm. To secure the
electrode strip to nerves, several suture holes are located on the
strip. Surgeons can use the holes to gently suture the electrode
directly to the nerve bundle, through the epineurium. Initial design [see FLESE#1 in Fig. 1(a)] has 9 mm length and 1 mm
width of strip. The second design [see FESE#2 in Fig. 1(b)] has

Fig. 2.

Fabrication process for FLESEs.

7.5 mm length and 0.5 mm width of strip, as well as a ground
round electrode on a longer body. These designs can, of course,
be adapted to different nerve sizes and shapes.
B. Device Fabrication
FLESEs are made of two layers of the polyimide with gold
sandwiched in between in strip-shape geometry. First, a 1-μm
Aluminum (Al) sacrificial layer was deposited on a silicon substrate, then a 6-μm polyimide (PI2611-HD-Mircrosystems) was
spin coated and hard cured under 300 °C for 30 min at a 4-°C/min
ramping rate [see Fig. 2(a)]. After deposition of 200-nm Al as a
hard mask, the bottom polyimide structure was patterned on the
thin-Al surface after the first lithography step [see Fig. 2(b)].

LEE et al.: FLEXIBLE EPINEURAL STRIP ELECTRODE FOR RECORDING IN FINE NERVES

Fig. 3.

583

SEM images (a) before and (b) after CNT coating on electrodes. (c) Magnified SEM images after CNT coating.

Afterward, the exposed polyimide was etched out by a reactive
plasma etching process (O2 gas flow 50 sccm and CF4 gas flow
10 sccm, RF power 150 W), the remaining Al layer was removed
[see Fig. 2(c)]. Layers of Titanium (Ti) (20 nm), and gold (Au)
(300 nm) metal electrodes, traces, and pads were subsequently
deposited and patterned by a metal evaporation and lift-off process [see Fig. 2(d)–(f)]. Next, a second layer of 6-μm polyimide
was coated and fully cured at 350 °C for 30 min [see Fig. 2(g)].
Using the same process as the first polyimide layer patterning,
the second polyimide layer was etched and the final structure
was formed [see Fig. 2(h)].
C. Device Releasing
The polyimide chip was released from the aluminum sacrificial etching using an electrochemical anodic dissolution process that is often used for metal refining and metal etching
[see Fig. 2(i)]. The Al-sacrificial layer on silicon substrate was
bonded with copper wire extension encapsulating by nonconductive glue. Then, a platinum (Pt) mesh electrode as an inert
electrode put together into a glass beaker of 0.5-M NaCl solution with gentle magnetic stirring. Voltages were applied to
the Pt electrode as cathode and the copper wire as anode. The
voltage was set below 1 V to avoid O2 formation at the anode.
While applying the voltage, the Al electrode is dissolved into
the electrolyte in the form of Al3+ or Al2 O3 by oxidation and
H2 gases released from the Pt surface by H+ reduction. Once
the electrodes were released from the substrate, they were rinsed
with 5% HCl acid to remove the suspended Al2 O3 on the device
surface.
D. Electrode Packaging
Pads on the FESEs electrodes were initially designed to match
the FPC connectors (Hirose Electric Co. Ltd.) so that the pads
were easily inserted with spacer into the connectors and connected by just clicking on them. The connectors avoided damage
to the thin-film electrodes during soldering and from tethering
force possibly applied during the in vivo experiments. The FPC
connector was soldered to omnetic cables encapsulated with
flexible and biocompatible silicon tube. Insulating UV epoxy

(Vitralit 4731 VT, Panacol-Elosol GmbH, Daimlerstr) was applied on each connection part to protect components mechanically as well as electrically from in vivo environment.
E. Coating of the Electrode Site (Au-CNT Nanocomposites)
CNTs has drawn the great interest by researcher due to its
excellent mechanical property, superior charge storage capacity,
lower impedance, and neurocompatibility [35]. Also, randomly
oriented multiwall CNTs (MWCNTs) enables intimate contact
with neurons and cells [30], [31]. Furthermore, CNT coating by
an electroplating method provides fabrication simplicity.
For the preparation of CNTs coating in this study, the MWCNTs (Cheap Tubes Inc., USA, length ∼0.5–2 μm, outer diameter
< 8 nm) were first dispersed in an Au electrolyte bath (TSG250, Transene, USA) to form a 1-mg·mL−1 aqueous solution.
Then, the whole solution was sonicated for 2 h to fully suspend the CNTs in the solution. After that, the packaged FESEs
and Au wire were connected to the negative and positive terminals of the power supply, respectively. Both the electrode
site and the Au wire were then inserted into the solution. A
monophasic voltage pulse (1.1 V, 50% duty cycle, 1 min) was
applied from the power source. Au ions in the solution, as well
as CNTs which absorbed Au ions, migrated to the negative terminals. After absorbing the electrons from the probe contacts,
the Au ions were subsequently deposited onto the surface of
the recording contacts. The surface morphology of CNT-coated
electrodes was characterized by SEM. Fig. 3 shows SEM images of the electrode before and after the CNT coating. Au
nanocomposites mixed with CNTs were formed on the surface
demonstrating that CNT-Au nanocomposites were successfully
coated on the electrode surface by the CNT coating method.
This rough and high porosity of surface coatings provides the
increment of electrochemical surface area resulting in drastic
decrease of interfacial impedance.
F. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
(EIS) Characterization
Impedance characterization of interfacial layers is of
paramount important for the performance of neural recording.

584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

adequate depth of anesthesia was attained, the right sciatic
nerves were exposed through a gluteal-splitting incision. The
FLESEs were placed around the proximal segment of the sciatic nerve. Special care was taken to prevent nerve damage.
H. Physiological Characterization

Fig. 4. Results from EIS for (a) the plot of interfacial impedances for with
and without CNT coating and (b) the plot of phase angle.

The neural signal will be lost in noisy if the electrode impedance
is not low enough [36]. In order to verify the change of interfacial impedances with and without Au-CNT-coated electrodes,
EIS was conducted in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Biowest,
pH 7.4, conductivity x1). The sinusoidal wave with amplitude
of 50 mV and frequency spans from 100 kHz to 0.7 Hz was applied. Three electrode configurations with the silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) electrode and a Pt wire as reference and counter
electrode, respectively, were used. The output impedance was
recorded in vitro with an impedance analyzer (Autolab PGSTAT100N voltage potentiostat/galvanostat, Metrohm).
The results of EIS are plotted in Fig. 4. Impedance without
CNT coating at 1 kHz was 47 ± 7 kΩ, while the impedance
dropped by one order of magnitude (3.6 ± 0.6 kΩ) after deposition of the CNT and Au composites and phase was −48°
at 1 kHz. Since high impedance increase signal distortion and
reduce SNR, only Au electrodes without CNT coating can not
record the high quality of neural signal, while the impedance
of electrodes with CNT coating is reasonably low and good for
neural signal recording (<10 kΩ).
G. Rat Preparation for In Vivo Test
The experiments were performed in adult female Sprague
Dawley rats (250 g) (In Vivos Pte Ltd, Singapore). The rats were
acclimatized for one week prior to use in the experiment, with
food and water provided ad libitum and 12-h lights ON/OFF. The
animal care and use procedures conformed to those outlined by
the Agri-Food & Veterinary Authority of Singapore, the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and the ethics commission of the National University of Singapore. The animals were
anesthetized with a single bolus injection of ketamine/xylazine
(150 and 10 mg/kg, respectively, intraperitoneal). After an

The neural signals are evoked by electrical stimulation during
acute recording tests (studies done under general anaesthesia);
evoked activity is used for testing the neural signal recording
as well as the calculation of nerve conduction velocity (NCV)
[37]. In this study, a sciatic nerve was directly stimulated, and
the evoked compound nerve action potentials (CNAPs) were
recorded from the sciatic nerve. The nerve was stimulated by
the application of a single monophasic 20-μs pulse, with amplitudes varying between 0.3 and 1.5 mA, using an isolated stimulator box (Digitimer Ltd., UK). This range (6–30 nC/Phase) is
acceptable according to the literature [38]. Signals from the implanted FLESEs were acquired using a multichannel amplifier
(USB-ME32-FAI System, Multichannel Systems, Inc., USA),
at a sampling rate of 50 kHz and a gain of 2000. Data acquisition was done using an MCS system and the data acquisition
software (MCRack).
I. Stimulation Electrode and Recording Configuration
A concentric bipolar electrode (Microprobe, Inc.) as a stimulation electrode was implanted proximal to the spinal cord.
Bipolar recordings were conducted using three sensing electrodes of FLESE#1 distally placed at about 10 mm distance
from the stimulus site. Fig. 5(a) shows the schematic diagram
of the implant. The reference electrode was placed in the body
in an electrically neutral place. Ground electrode was separately
connected to the tail of the rat.
A lab-made hook electrode as another stimulation electrode
was implanted at the stimulus site. Differential bipolar recording
was conducted indicating that one reference electrode and two
sensing electrodes from FLESE#2 were placed on the sciatic
nerve. Fig. 5(c) shows the schematic diagram of the implant.
The ground electrode on the body of FLESE#2 was contacted
to near body.
J. Data Analysis
Electrophysiological data were analyzed using custom-made
algorithms in MATLAB (Mathworks, Inc., USA). The NCAPs
following the stimulation artifact were identified by the latency
of peak as well as the peak–peak amplitude.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. In Vivo Recording (FLESE#1 and Bipolar Configuration)
Elicited by a Concentric Bipolar Electrode
The FLESE#1 was successfully sutured on a sciatic nerve by
microsurgical techniques [see Fig. 5(b)]. Fig. 6(a) shows the
recorded CNAP from three different electrodes (E#1, E#2, and
E#3) for varying stimulation currents. Each trace corresponds
to the average obtained from recording over 50 CNAPs. The

LEE et al.: FLEXIBLE EPINEURAL STRIP ELECTRODE FOR RECORDING IN FINE NERVES

585

Fig. 5. Schematic diagrams of implanted FLESE#1 (a) and FLESE#2 (c) with the stimulation electrodes. The pictures of implanted FLESE#1 (b) and FLESE#2
(d) on rat sciatic nerves.

experiment demonstrates that the stimulation current of around
1 mA is the threshold for stimulation of the sciatic nerve by
the concentric bipolar electrode. The latency of peak of the
CNAP that indicates the time from the onset of the stimulation
artifact to the onset of the CNAP was 0.41, 0.42, and 0.44 ms,
respectively, from the three electrodes. NCV can be calculated
by the below equation [39]:
NCV = Δx/Δt

Fig. 6. Results of CNAP recordings of FLESE#1 on a main sciatic nerve
elicited by the concentric bipolar electrode (a) before and (b) after applying
xylocaine for a nerve block.

CNAPs were recorded following the stimulation artifact: 1) there
were no CNAPs of significant amplitude recorded from the
electrodes during the stimulation of 0.3 mA, 2) whereas clear
and fine neural signals were recorded from the three electrodes
at 1 mA, and 3) after the stimulation currents of more than
1 mA, the amplitude of recorded signals did not increase. This

(1)

where Δx is the distance that CNAP travels, and Δt is the
time that it takes to cover this distance. The calculated NCV
is 24–36 m/s. This matches well with the established NCV of
the fastest fibers in rat sciatic nerves [40]. The mean amplitude
of CNAP from E#1 was 716.15 ± 39.74 μV, that of E#2 was
584.28 ± 42.9 μV and that of E#3 was 272.94 ± 50.55 μV. This
can be attributed to the difference in the distance between the
sensing electrodes and the reference electrode.
To verify whether the recorded CNAPs are corrupted by any
external noises, such as EMG or the source of stimulation, xylocaine that is normally used for blocking nerve function [41]
was applied to the nerve during stimulation with 1-mA current,
and CNAP recordings were conducted after 10 min. The result of recorded CNAP after 10 min shows that no signal was
recorded except for the stimulus artifact [see Fig. 6(b)]. This
demonstrates that the recorded CNAP before blocking nerve is
not corrupted. However, the needle-type concentric electrode
showed the difficulty of reliable and repeatable implantation
since some movements of near muscles during the stimulation
made lose its original position as well as repeatable pricking
for the same stimulus position cause blooding the sciatic nerve
degrading normal nerve condition.

586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

main sciatic nerve elicited by the hook electrode with stimulus
current of 1 mA. The mean amplitude of CNAP from E#1 was
235.7±20.1 μV and that from E#2 was 466.1±34.6 μV. The difference of amplitude is most likely due to the nature of conduction or organization of axonal fiber/fascicles or placement. Short
distances between reference and recording electrodes compensates CNAP resulting in low amplitudes [24]. In the main sciatic
nerve, distance gap of 3 mm between the recording electrode
#1 and #2 resulted in a 230 μV difference. For noise analysis,
the mean amplitude of the noise from the electrodes was 12.60
± 0.84 μV, which were identified before and after the CNAP.
IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 7. Results of CNAP recording of FLESE#2 from E#1 and E#2 on a main
sciatic nerve elicited by a hook electrode.

B. In Vivo Recording (FLESE#2 and Differential Bipolar
Configuration) Elicited by a Hook Electrode
The FLESE#2 has narrower strip body that easily sticks even
on the smaller branches of sciatic nerves (the diameters of 0.2–
0.3 mm) compared with the FLESE#1. Also, it has longer tail
body to the connector so that it allows for a stable implantation
by reducing the tethering force. Also, ground electrode is on the
tail body so that an additional or separate ground electrodes is
not necessary, which again would be desirable for long-term implantation. The FLESE#2s were readily put on the main sciatic
nerve and very small branch nerves [see Fig. 5(d)]. Furthermore, they showed good adhesion properties enough to stick
the nerves without any suturing during the acute recording procedure. This might be due to the narrow width of the strip body,
which reduces noncontact areas, promoting a stronger interface
between the strip body and the nerve, as well as CNT‘s adhesion
properties.
Differential bipolar configuration was used for CNAP recording. It is a more effective way for recording in that the activity
that is distant from both electrodes appears as common mode to
the two recording electrodes, and is rejected, while activity in
the immediate vicinity of the two electrode is differential mode
and is amplified [24]. Also, the bipolar configuration requires
an additional reference electrode put inside the body, which
also limits long-term implantation. One sensing electrode on
the FLESE#2 was set as a reference electrode and the other
two sensing electrodes were set as recording electrodes [see
Fig. 5(c)]. Also, the hook electrode was used as the stimulation
electrode for more reliable and repeatable stimulation. The stimulation protocol was as described above. Threshold stimulation
current was found to be around 1 mA and clear and fine CNAPs
were recorded. Fig. 7 shows the result of recorded CNAP (n =
60) from the two recording electrodes on the FLESE#2 in a rat

The FLESEs were proposed and investigated as new concepts for recording from small nerves. The Au-CNTs-coated
sensing electrodes showed reasonable interfacial impedance at
1 kHz as well as good adhesion properties on nerves. In addition, there is no risk for applying pressure on nerve that eventually causes nerve damage. Sciatic nerve in a rat was stimulated by using different types of electrodes (a concentric bipolar
electrode and a hook electrode), and clear and fine CNAPs
were recorded through bipolar or differential bipolar configuration. The FLESE#2 not only showed good adhesion properties enough to implant without suturing during acute recording
experiment, but the longer tail body was also beneficial for
reducing the tethering force that would be encountered during implantation. In addition, locating a ground electrode on
the tail body would be beneficial for long-term implantation
with differential bipolar recording. Also, the recorded CNAPs
demonstrates that 3 mm distance between reference and recording electrodes for differential bipolar configuration is enough
to record clear CNAPs, although the amplitude is lower than
with a 6 mm distance. It means that total length of strip body
can be reduced further maintaining the maximum recording
ability. Overall experimental results demonstrate that FLESE
could play an important role in clinical neuroprosthetics and
neurotherapeutic technologies in the near future.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Raspopovic et al., “Restoring natural sensory feedback in realtime bidirectional hand prostheses,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 6, no. 222,
pp. 222ra19, 2014.
[2] K. Famm et al., “A jump-start for electroceuticals,” Nature, vol. 496,
pp. 159–161, 2013.
[3] S. Reardon, “Electroceuticals spark interest,” Nature, vol. 511, pp. 18,
2014.
[4] R. A. Gaunt and A. Prochazka, “Control of urinary bladder function with
devices: Successes and failures,” Prog. Brain Res., vol. 152, pp. 163–194,
2006.
[5] N. Stakenborg et al., “The versatile role of the vagus nerve in the gastrointestinal tract,” EMJ Gastroenterol., vol. 1, pp. 106–114, 2013.
[6] G. C. Naples et al., “A spiral nerve cuff electrode for peripheral nerve
stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 905–916,
Nov. 1988.
[7] J. A. Hoffer and K. Kallesor, How to Use Nerve Cuffs to Stimulate, Record
or Modulate Neural Activity. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2001.
[8] D. J. Tyler and D. M. Durand, “Functionally selective peripheral nerve
stimulation with a flat interface nerve electrode,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 294–303, Dec. 2002.
[9] D. W. Tan et al., “A neural interface provides long-term stable natural
touch perception,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 6, pp. 257ra138, 2014.

LEE et al.: FLEXIBLE EPINEURAL STRIP ELECTRODE FOR RECORDING IN FINE NERVES

[10] N. Lago et al., “Assessment of biocompatibility of chronically implanted
polyimide and platinum intrafascicular electrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 281–290, Feb. 2007.
[11] T. Boretius et al., “A transverse intrafascicular multichannel electrode
(TIME) to interface with the peripheral nerve,” Biosen. Bioelectron.,
vol. 26, pp. 62–69, 2010.
[12] J. Badia et al., “Biocompatibility of chronically implanted transverse intrafascicular multichannel electrode (TIME) in the rat sciatic nerve,” IEEE
Trans. BioMed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2324–2332, Aug. 2011.
[13] M. B. Christensen et al., “The foreign body response to the utah slant
electrode array in the cat sciatic nerve,” Acta Biomaterialia, vol. 10,
pp. 4650–4660, 2014.
[14] H. A. C. Wark et al., “A new high-density penetrating microelectrode array
for recording and stimulating sub-millimeter neuroanatomical structures,”
J. Neural. Eng., vol. 10, art. no. 045003, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[15] H. A. C. Wark et al., “Behavioral and cellular consequences of highelectrode count utah arrays chronically implanted in rat sciatic nerve,” J.
Neural. Eng., vol. 11, art. no. 046027, pp. 1–13, 2014.
[16] S. P. Lacour et al., “Polyimide micro-channel arrays for peripheral nerve regenerative implants,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 147,
pp. 456–463, 2008.
[17] S. P. Lacour et al., “Long micro-channel electrode arrays: A novel type of
regenerative peripheral nerve interface,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 454–460, Oct. 2009.
[18] R. Midha, “Emerging techniques for nerve repair: Nerve transfers and
nerve guidance tubes,” Clin. Neurosurg., vol. 53, pp. 185–190, 2006.
[19] J. IJkema-Paassen et al., “Transection of peripheral nerves, bridging strategies and effect evaluation,” Biomaterials, vol. 25, pp. 1583–1592, 2004.
[20] G. E. Rutkowski et al., “Synergistic effects of micropatterned biodegradable conduits and Schwann cells on sciatic nerve regeneration,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 1, pp. 151–157, 2004.
[21] I. P. Clements et al., “Regenerative scaffold electrodes for peripheral
nerve interfacing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 554–566, Jul. 2013.
[22] J. Scheib and A. Hoke, “Advances in peripheral nerve regeneration,”
Nature, vol. 9, pp. 668–676, 2013.
[23] G. D. Pino et al., “Invasive neural interfaces: the perspective of the surgeon,” J. Surg. Res., vol. 188, pp. 77–87, 2014.
[24] K. W. Horch and G. S. Dhillon, Neuroprosthetics: Theory and Practice,
vol. 2. Singapore: World Scientific, 2004.
[25] B. Hiebl et al., “In vivo assessment of tissue compatibility and functionality of a polyimide cuff electrode for recording afferent peripheral nerve signals,” Appl. Cardiopulmonary Pathophysiol., vol. 14,
pp. 212–219, 2010
[26] S. M. Restaino et al., “Biomechanical and functional variation in rat
sciatic nerve following cuff electrode implantation,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.
vol. 11, pp.73, 2014.

587

[27] H. Yu et al., “A parylene self-locking cuff electrode for peripheral
nerve stimulation and recording,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 23,
pp. 1025–1035, 2014.
[28] X. Kang et al., “Self-closed parylene cuff electrode for peripheral nerve
recording,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 24, pp. 319–332, 2015.
[29] K. Wang et al., “Neural stimulation with a carbon nanotube microelectrode
array,” Nano Lett., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 2043–2048, 2006.
[30] G. Cellot et al., “Carbon nanotubes might improve neuronal performance by favouring electrical shortcuts,” Nature Nanotechnol., vol. 4,
pp. 126–133, 2009.
[31] A. O. Fung et al., “Electrochemical properties and myocyte interaction of carbon nanotube microelectrodes,” Nano Lett., vol. 10,
pp. 4321–4327, 2010.
[32] E. W. Keefer et al., “Carbon nanotube coating improves neuronal recordings,” Nature Natnotechnol., vol. 3, pp. 434–439, 2008.
[33] A.O. Lobo et al., “Cell viability and adhesion on as grown multi-wall
carbon nanotube films,” Mater. Sci. Eng. C, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 264–269,
2008.
[34] P. Galvan-Garcia et al., “Robust cell migration and neuronal growth on
pristine carbon nanotube sheets and yarns,” J. Biomater. Sci. Polymer Ed.,
vol. 10, pp. 1245–1261, 2007.
[35] S. Minnikanti and N. Peixoto, “Implantable electrodes with carbon nanotube coating,” in Carbon Nanotubes Applications on Electron Devices.
Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2011
[36] W. Franks et al., “Impedance characterization and modeling of
electrodes for biomedical applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1295–1302, Jul. 2005.
[37] K. S. Mathews et al., “Assessment of rat sciatic nerve function following
acute implanatation of high densigy utah slanted electrode array (25 electrodes/mm(2)) based on neural recordings and evoked muscle activity,”
Muscle Nerve, vol. 3, pp. 417–424, 2014.
[38] A. Branner and R. A. Normann, “A multielectrode array for intrafascicular recording and stimulation in sciatic nerve of cats,” Brain Res. Bull.,
vol. 51, pp. 293–306, 2000.
[39] J. Li et al., “Current distance relationships for peripheral nerve
stimulation localization,” Anesthesia Analgesia, vol. 112, no. 1,
pp. 236–241, 2011.
[40] N. Dalkilic et al., “The effect of tramadol on the rat sciatic nerve conduction: A numerical analysis and conduction velocity distribution study,”
Yakgaku Zasshi, vol. 4, pp. 485–493, 2009.
[41] J. G. Thalhammer et al., “Neurologic evaluation of the rat during sciatic
nerve block with lidocaine,” Anesthesiology, vol. 4, pp. 1013–1025, 1995.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

