540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fully Textile, PEDOT:PSS Based Electrodes for
Wearable ECG Monitoring Systems
Danilo Pani∗ , Member, IEEE, Alessia Dessı̀, Member, IEEE, Jose F. Saenz-Cogollo, Gianluca Barabino,
Beatrice Fraboni, and Annalisa Bonfiglio, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: To evaluate a novel kind of textile electrodes
based on woven fabrics treated with PEDOT:PSS, through an easy
fabrication process, testing these electrodes for biopotential recordings. Methods: Fabrication is based on raw fabric soaking in PEDOT:PSS using a second dopant, squeezing and annealing. The
electrodes have been tested on human volunteers, in terms of both
skin contact impedance and quality of the ECG signals recorded at
rest and during physical activity (power spectral density, baseline
wandering, QRS detectability, and broadband noise). Results: The
electrodes are able to operate in both wet and dry conditions. Dry
electrodes are more prone to noise artifacts, especially during physical exercise and mainly due to the unstable contact between the
electrode and the skin. Wet (saline) electrodes present a stable and
reproducible behavior, which is comparable or better than that of
traditional disposable gelled Ag/AgCl electrodes. Conclusion: The
achieved results reveal the capability of this kind of electrodes to
work without the electrolyte, providing a valuable interface with
the skin, due to mixed electronic and ionic conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. These electrodes can be effectively used for acquiring
ECG signals. Significance: Textile electrodes based on PEDOT:PSS
represent an important milestone in wearable monitoring, as they
present an easy and reproducible fabrication process, very good
performance in wet and dry (at rest) conditions and a superior
level of comfort with respect to textile electrodes proposed so far.
This paves the way to their integration into smart garments.
Index Terms—Biomedical electrodes, electrocardiography, PEDOT:PSS, textile electrodes, textile technology.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARLY detection of diseases and health monitoring are primary goals of today’s healthcare systems [1]. Long-term
monitoring of electrocardiographic (ECG) signals can provide
enhanced diagnostics at a low cost, by capturing intermittent
episodes in arrhythmias and ischemia [2]. Commercial dynamic
ECG recorders (Holter), progressively more lightweight and
portable, are paving the way to a new generation of unobtrusive diagnostic/monitoring systems. Systems like CardioLeaf

E

Manuscript received February 8, 2015; revised June 7, 2015; accepted August
2, 2015. Date of publication August 7, 2015; date of current version February 16,
2016. The work of A. Dessı̀ was supported by Sardinia Regional Government
(POR Sardegna FSE Operational Programme of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia, European Social Fund 2007-2013-Axis IV Human Resources, Objective
l.3, Line of Activity l.3.1). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. Pani is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari 09123, Italy (e-mail: pani@diee.unica.it).
A. Dessı̀, J. F. Saenz-Cogollo, G. Barabino and A. Bonfiglio are with the
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Cagliari,
Italy.
B. Fraboni is with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Bologna, Italy.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2465936

ULTRA by Clearbridge, or ZIO by iRhythm Technologies, mix
the traditional electrodes technologies with wearable microelectronic implementations for long-term ECG monitoring. However, a step further of the research is needed in order to overcome
the limits of the current sensors, embedding them in the garments
[3] as textile electrodes for intelligent biomedical clothing [4].
The application of textile electrodes embedded into smart
garments for ECG monitoring ranges from elderly monitoring
(heart failure prevention) [5] to telehealth [6], including sport or
extreme conditions [6], infants monitoring [7] and clinical use
[8], [9]. The same technology has also been extended to nongarment textiles, like those on household furniture, for similar
purposes [9], [10], or to produce headbands to record other electrophysiological signals such as EMG [11] and EEG [12], [13].
Textile electrodes are expected to overcome the main limits of
the widely used Ag/AgCl disposable electrodes, which require
a gel electrolyte to properly work. This gel (along with the electrode adhesive), when applied for a long time, can stimulate the
skin, causing rash or reaction [14]. Moreover, gel drying causes
increased impedance, which in turn means more noise and artifacts [15]. Dry textile electrodes can overcome these problems,
with the drawback of a higher contact impedance [16], due to the
material but also to the irregular electrode surface [17]. Most dry
textile electrodes reported in the recent literature exhibit high
skin contact impedance, which either limits their use when very
small signals must be recorded [12] or poses doubts about the
achievable signal quality [18], [19], even though some examples of clinically acceptable results have been recently provided
[8]. These textile electrodes are usually based on fine metal
wires, or metal coated yarns, woven or stitched with conventional textile fibers. Different materials and fabrication methods have been presented so far [20]. With the development
of conductive polymers, it became possible to transform nonconductive textile fibers into flexible and reliable conductors
[21]. Among the different available conducting polymers, poly3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene doped with poly(styrene sulfonate)
(PEDOT:PSS) is one of the most used. It has attracted wide attention as electrode material in several applications, due to its
excellent characteristics such as low band gap and superior electrochemical and thermal stability. Due to its biocompatibility,
it has been used to create electrodes for recording extracellular
potentials both in vitro and in vivo [22]. PEDOT:PSS treated
fabrics, employed for electrodes fabrication, have an invaluable
advantage compared to other conductive textiles. They show a
decreased electrochemical impedance mismatch between tissue
and electrode, thus avoiding the need for conductive gels. This
is due to their mixed electronic and ionic conductivity and high

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PANI et al.: FULLY TEXTILE, PEDOT:PSS BASED ELECTRODES FOR WEARABLE ECG MONITORING SYSTEMS

ionic mobility. However, so far, there have been a few attempts
to use PEDOT:PSS for making textile electrodes relying either
on a rigid support [23] or on a semirigid Ag/AgCl wire [24].
In this paper, we present a novel approach for the fabrication of bio-potential electrodes, based on the treatment of a
standard textile fabric with a highly conductive PEDOT:PSS
solution. The performance of the proposed electrodes has been
compared with that of disposable gelled Ag/AgCl electrodes
in ECG recordings on human volunteers. The quality of the
recorded signals, under static (rest) and dynamic (exercise) conditions, has also been assessed. A small-sized custom Holter
monitor has been developed to independently record signals
from pairs of different electrodes with known analog processing. The achieved results are very promising, opening the door
to the possibility of developing smart garments for unobtrusive
ECG monitoring, as well as to the extension of their use for
recording other biopotentials.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Electrodes Fabrication
Textile electrodes are made by treating conventional fabrics
with a highly conductive solution of PEDOT:PSS. It is widely
known that, in order to achieve reasonable conductivity values
of PEDOT:PSS, a second dopant should be used. The conductivity can be enhanced from one to three orders of magnitude
by the addition of poly-alcohols (alcohols with more than two
OH groups on each molecule, e.g., ethylene glycol, glycerol,
sorbitol) or high-dielectric solvents (dimethyl sulfoxide, N-N
dimethylformamide, tetrahydrofuran) [15], [25], [26]. For the
preparation of the conductive fabrics, we chose to test the effect
of sorbitol, ethylene glycol and glycerol since they have reported
the highest conductivities [15], [27], [28]. The screened chemicals were mixed at different proportions with the PEDOT:PSS
dispersion Clevios PH 500 (Heraeus Clevios - Germany) with
a magnetic stirrer until a homogeneous solution was obtained.
Woven cotton (250 μm thick) and polyester fabrics (400 μm
thick) were used as received, and immersed for at least 48 h at
room temperature in the polymer solution. Fabrics were then removed from the PEDOT solution and squeezed between metallic
rolling cylinders to remove the solution in excess. Samples were
then annealed at 180 °C for 3 min, roughly the time needed for
both water and second dopant to evaporate in order to avoid
deterioration of the fabric mechanical properties.
Dried fabrics were cut in 35 mm × 65 mm pieces and the
surface resistance measured. In order to evaluate the properties
of the conductive fabrics as surface bio-potentials electrodes,
without any disturbance due to other materials getting in touch
with the skin, the conductive fabric was sewed to a nonconductive 35 mm × 35 mm layered structure of foam (4 mm)
and polyester, using simple cotton yarn. In order to obtain reproducible samples, all sewing was performed following an
automatic procedure developed with an electronic embroidering machine (Brother Innovi’s 955). After sewing, the active
area of electrodes is reduced to 30 mm × 30 mm. The size of
the electrodes, which is acceptable for ECG monitoring, has
been chosen to ensure a good reproducibility of the custom
fabrication process. The introduction of foam layers allows

Fig. 1.

541

Prototypical PEDOT:PSS textile electrode.

improving the contact between the electrode and the skin by
ensuring a uniform pressure, which is especially beneficial in
case of dry electrodes. In fact, some authors associate the baseline drift, which is a typical artifact in signals acquired by textile
electrodes, to a variation in the contact pressure, which can be
reduced by a soft layer of foam [29]. The presence of the foam
also allows keeping the electrode wet (physiologically or artificially) in order to reduce the contact impedance [12].
The exceeding 20 mm × 30 mm of conductive fabric on one
side was used to attach a metallic snap fastener, as shown in
Fig. 1, which has a termination similar to the commercial disposable electrodes, allowing a direct connection with standard
patient cables. The snap fastener was fixed to the fabric with
a silver conductive paste and then secured by sewing it with a
silver-coated yarn (Shieldex 117/12 × 2 ply, Statex - Germany).
In such a way, the snap fastener remains in a tail of the fabric
that can be flipped over the rear of the electrode not getting in
touch with the skin. It should be noted that, similarly to other
relevant works in the field [30], the focus of this paper is on the
evaluation of this novel kind of textile electrode rather than on
its integration in a smart garment. However, given the extreme
versatility of the fabrication technique, an integration of the
electrode in a garment could be obtained by selectively treating
predefined portions of the garment with a similar procedure.
The choice of woven cotton and polyester fabrics was motivated by the idea of having common textile materials instead
of rare and expensive ones. Notably, the proposed approach can
be applied to any kind of textile material able to absorb and retain the conductive polymer. Furthermore, we chose flexible but
unstretchable fabrics in order to reduce the effect of the stretch
on the electrode-skin contact impedance [17]. In fact, flexibility
and stretchability can confer to conductive textiles the ability
to act as strain gauges, changing their impedance as a function
of the stretch level [31]. Clearly, this feature is not desirable
for an electrode, which should maintain its impedance constant
despite the occurrence of mechanical deformations.
B. Experimental Setup
Several experimental strategies were adopted in order to evaluate the different aspects of the textile electrodes. In the absence

542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

of any guideline for testing the textile electrodes, available, on
the contrary, for disposable gelled ones [15], we performed the
analyses looking at commonly used meaningful figures of merit
in the field.
In order to evaluate the conductivity of treated fabrics and
compare the different materials and treatments, we used a Source
Meter 2336/2612 (Keithley Instruments, Ohio - USA) in a fourwire configuration. A current of 1.0 mA was applied through
40 mm long flat clamps separated 40 mm between them. The
voltage, measured at a constant current between pin electrodes
separated 28 mm over the fabric, was used to estimate the fabric
conductivity. We calculated the conductivity of the fabric using
the equation that relates the resistance and the conductivity of
a flat sheet of solid material. Since a fabric is not a solid with
a defined thickness, such calculation is only an approximation,
good enough for the purposes of this evaluation.
The skin contact impedance of 20 textile electrodes was measured on a single subject (hereafter called subject 1) in order
to evaluate the variability of the electrodes characteristics. Two
types of impedance measurements were made: one at 10 Hz
using the FDA cleared Prep-Check impedance meter (General
Devices) and one at other nine different frequencies ranging
from 20 to 250 Hz using a high precision impedance meter
(LCR Meter Agilent 4282A). The lower frequency limit is imposed by the instrument, whereas the upper one is meaningful in
the light of the international recommendations for the interpretation of clinical rest ECG in adults and infants [42]. To improve
reproducibility, a light skin preparation (with Everi Cream by
Spes Medica) has been carried out in the area where the test
electrode had to be placed (i.e., in the right hemithorax, in the
space between the anterior axillary and midaxillary lines). Noticeably, a mild skin preparation has a low impact on the dry
electrode-skin contact impedance [16], but it is able to improve
the homogeneity within the experimental group, for both textile
and Ag/AgCl electrodes, achieving comparable starting conditions without affecting the intrinsic intersubject differences. The
electrodes have been applied under an elastic belt, 47 mm large,
positioned just below the chest muscles [16], [32]. The use of
chest belt allows keeping the electrode in place ensuring a good
electrical contact with the skin, constantly over time, during the
impedance measurement [33].
Two commercial Ag/AgCl electrodes (FIAB F9079, foam
with solid hydrogel) have been applied just below the belt,
10 mm spaced, in the same anatomical area. For them, a deep
skin preparation consisting of gentle scrub with Everi Cream followed by a harder mechanical scrub (with a thin plastic scraper
and Neurgel by Spes Medica) has been performed. Neurgel has
been left in place to improve the conductivity of the solid hydrogel of the commercial electrodes. The skin contact impedance
at 10 Hz for the Ag/AgCl electrode undergoing this hard skin
preparation, measured as depicted on the right part of Fig. 2
between terminals 2 and R, and halving the value read on the
Prep-Check impedance meter, was about 9 kΩ, including one
half of the body impedance contribution. The impedance measurement at 10 Hz has been carried out between the textile
electrode and one of the Ag/AgCl electrodes, i.e., between terminal 1 and R in the left part of Fig. 2, so that the measured value

Fig. 2. Equivalent electrical diagrams of the acquisition setup used for the
impedance measurement with the FDA approved Prep-Check meter. The textile
electrode is depicted as a blue square, the Ag/AgCl electrodes as red circles. It
should be noted that Z b o d y is negligible compared to the electrode-skin contact
impedance in both cases.

includes both the skin-textile electrode and the skin-Ag/AgCl
electrode contact impedance contributions, plus the negligible
body impedance. Such an inhomogeneous setup, common to
other works in the field [34], has been chosen to avoid saturation of the Prep-Check impedance meter, exhibiting a saturation
value of 200 kΩ. Moreover, this instrument provides only the
modulus of the impedance, avoiding any a posteriori correction.
The same setup was then used for the impedance evaluation
at the other frequencies, from 20 to 250 Hz, exploiting the LCR
meter, keeping the injected sinusoidal current below 1 μA. In this
case, the two Ag/AgCl electrodes have been used to measure the
skin contact impedance on the same points, obtaining a reference
complex impedance to be subtracted from the measured one.
This leads a good estimate of the skin-textile electrode contact
impedance. Such a measurement has been performed only on
subject 1.
In order to reduce the noise potentially affecting these
impedance measurements, regardless the adopted instrument,
they have been performed in an anechoic chamber with filtered
mains and lamps with reduced electromagnetic emission at the
low frequencies. The presence of an isolation transformer also
represents a safety measure for the impedance evaluation with
the LCR meter on subject 1. The temperature of the room has
been kept at 25 °C during all the measurements, in order to reduce the influence of this parameter on the skin conductivity. A
delay of 5 min between electrodes positioning and impedance
measurement has been provided to ensure the electrode stabilization [15], [19].
Ten healthy volunteers of the research group (aged 29 ± 4,
BMI 22.3 ± 2.0) were enrolled in the study to evaluate both
electrode-skin contact impedance and ECG signals quality. The
study has been performed following the principles outlined in
the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000; all the
volunteers gave their informed consent to the measurements,
which lasted from 20 to 30 min per subject. The acquisition
protocol for impedance measurement was the same described
above, including the skin preparation procedure, but only the
FDA cleared device at 10 Hz has been used to measure the total
impedance between textile and Ag/AgCl electrodes.

PANI et al.: FULLY TEXTILE, PEDOT:PSS BASED ELECTRODES FOR WEARABLE ECG MONITORING SYSTEMS

For ECG signal acquisition, rather than choosing convenient
positions to reduce the artifacts, e.g., as in [8], [16], we opted
for the single lead standard Holter placement (second lead for
seven-electrode configuration). In this configuration, the negative electrode is placed close to the right clavicle (lateral to the
midclavicular line) and the positive one is placed close to the
sixth intercostal space on the anterior axillary line. Two couples
of electrodes have been positioned, the textile ones (fixed by
means of a TNT adhesive surgical tape) above the line connecting said points, the Ag/AgCl ones below the same line, so that
the homologous electrodes lay on the perpendicular to the lead
direction. As ground electrode, the same Ag/AgCl electrode
used for the impedance measurement was chosen. The obtained
lead is approximately oriented along the cardiac axis, where the
strongest signals can be measured [16]. The choice of a standard
placement has the intrinsic advantage of conveying meaningful
information for a visual inspection by a cardiologist.
The experimental protocol was designed to include both rest
(subject sitting, no physical movements, normal breathing, 60 s
of acquisition) and dynamic conditions (about 30 s for each
different condition):
1) deep breathing (subject sitting, six deep respiratory acts);
2) stairs climbing up and down, following a 1 Hz pace (one
stair-step per second);
3) step exercise, following a 2 Hz pace (every half second a
movement up or down the step).
Despite the impedance measurements have been performed
in the closed anechoic chamber, as motivated before, ECG signals have been acquired in normal lab rooms and other generic
departmental structures, to avoid any attenuation of the typical
electromagnetic interferences present in common environment.
Both dry and wet (two drops of saline solution, sodium chloride
0.9%, about 0.10 ml) conditions were tested. Saline was chosen
because it is a liquid with a composition similar to the human
sweat, normally acting as a weak electrolyte [12], and to ensure
reproducibility of the achieved results compared to the simple
tap water exploited in other works [15].
A 48 h test on a subject, with impedance measurement performed at 10 Hz exploiting the portable Prep-Check meter every
hour during the daytime and keeping the electrodes in place during the night, has been carried out to evaluate the durability of
the electrodes and the drying time. The measurements have been
performed by the subject itself, in different locations, according
to his activity.
Throughout the results section, box and whiskers plots have
been used for the pictorial representation of samples distributions, since the largest part of them are not symmetric. In such
figures, the median is highlighted, the box defines the 50% of the
samples between the first and third quartile, and the whiskers
range from the minimum to the maximum value, excluding
the outliers (represented with crosses). The outliers are defined
as data larger than q3 + 1.5(q3 − q1 ) or smaller than q1 −
1.5(q3 − q1 ), where q1 and q3 are the 25th and 75th percentiles,
respectively, corresponding to approximately ±2.7σ and 99.3
coverage, if the data are normally distributed.
1) Recording Unit: In order to provide a fair comparison of
the ECG signals acquired by means of different electrodes, a

543

dedicated wearable bio-potentials recording system has been
designed. Compared to clinical ECG recorders, it allows acquiring two ECG channels simultaneously and independently,
with minimal and known signal conditioning before A/D conversion in order to better evaluate quality differences among
signals in various conditions. The developed recording unit is
based on the ADS1292 monolithic analog front-end, specifically designed for ECG applications, with programmable input
gain and 1 GΩ input impedance. It features a 24-bit analog
to digital converter (ADC), composed of two ΣΔ converters,
which operate in parallel to obtain a simultaneous acquisition.
This architecture relaxes the constraints for the input antialiasing filter thanks to the decimation filter at the ADC output. In
fact, only an adequate attenuation at multiples of the modulator
input sampling frequency is needed. A sampling frequency of
512 Hz, derived from a modulator frequency of 128 kHz, has
been chosen. A value of 4.7 nF of the external capacitor included
in the input amplifier of each channel sets the cutoff frequency
of the low-pass input filter to 8.4 kHz, which leads to a minimal
ECG signal distortion, according to the device specifications
(by increasing the capacitance value also the total harmonic distortion degrades). An electromagnetic interference (EMI) filter
precedes the input stages with a cutoff frequency set at 3 MHz.
Devices of this family have been already used in the past for
the tests on textile electrodes, coupled with a National Instruments digital acquisition card [31]. In the developed wearable
unit, the analog front-end is controlled by a MSP430F5515 microcontroller via an SPI port. This has been used to configure
it, read the data whenever available and write them to a microSD card. The system is interfaced to the outer world via an
USB port, which serves primarily as programming interface.
The same port can be used also to stream data to a PC, but this
feature has not been exploited in this test. The device, which
weighs only 102 g, is supplied by a single 4.2 V rechargeable
Li-ion battery.
A reference electrode connected to the subject can be internally tied to a right-leg-drive circuitry or simply to the system reference via a protection resistor. The latter configuration
has been chosen here, due to its passive nature and the limited benefit of the active drive revealed by our tests [7]. The
measurements have been carried out using unshielded cables
(MLA0315, ADInstruments Inc.) connected to the safe-lead recessed connectors of the recording unit. A block diagram of the
recording unit in the setup exploited for the ECG measurements
is presented in Fig. 3.
C. Performance Indexes and Signal Processing
The measurements, aiming at assessing the quality of the
signals, require data postprocessing to extract valuable figures
of merit. The adopted techniques are presented here.
To evaluate the broadband noise in absence of any physiological signal of interest, the rms power in the isoelectric
region [35] can be exploited. An estimation of the electrical
noise could also be obtained through the acquisition of a signal
from a silent part of the body, with respect to the ECG (e.g.,
where the impedance measurement is performed). However, by

544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

TABLE I
CONDUCTIVITY OF PEDOT:PSS COATED FABRICS; COMPARISON OF SECOND
DOPANTS AND TEXTILE MATERIALS
Fabric material
Sorbitol
Woven Cotton
Woven Polyester

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the recording unit and its connection to the subject
during the performed tests. The supply voltages for both the analog section
AVCC (+2.5 V), AVSS (−2.5 V) and the digital one DVCC (+3.3 V) are
derived from a single power source (battery).

processing real ECG signals it is possible to include all the conditions that are present in the real ECG measurement the rms
value is referred to (impedance, noise coupling, etc.), leading to
an index coherent with the other parameters extracted from the
signal. Such an approach, with a different processing technique
to isolate the noise, has been also used in [15] and in other
works. In this work, we decided to estimate the rms around the
isoelectric line, after baseline-drift correction.
At first, the very low-frequency components are removed
from the signal. This is needed since one of the main problems
of dry electrodes in the literature is the presence of baseline
wandering artifacts in the signal. Different interpretations have
been given to this phenomenon, partly attributed to the material
characteristics [15] and partly to contact stability (pressure)
[29], which in turn depends on the high electrode-skin contact
impedance. Such a narrowband noise is quite intense, and it
could mask other signal components in the spectrum. For this
reason, it is usually removed also for PSD analysis. In this study,
we removed the baseline wandering interference by using a
nonlinear filter [36], avoiding traditional linear filtering to limit
spectral distortion. The signal baseline is estimated and saved for
further use, then subtracted from the original signal. Similarly,
in [12], a linear detrending procedure is used to remove the
polarization trend in EEG recording but this approach is not
adequate when the low-frequency artifact is not monotonic, as
for the ECG signals.
After baseline canceling, a wavelet-based ECG delineator
[37] has been used to extract the segments of the signals between
the end of a T wave and the onset of the next P wave. These
segments have been concatenated, to isolate the parts related to
the isoelectric line only. This allows estimating the broadband
noise level without the interference of the main ECG waves,
alternatively to residual signal analysis [15].
As said, this approach to the computation of the rms of the
broadband noise does not consider the important contribution
of the baseline wandering. In order to provide an estimation of
the amount of low-frequency noise, it is possible to compute
the rms of the centered previously extracted baseline. Centering
removes the dc component, that would considerably affect the
rms computation. This is equivalent to computing the standard
deviation of the estimated baseline, which provides a simple
informative index for the evaluation of this narrowband noise.
To check the distribution of the frequency components, on
a single subject at rest, we exploited the PSD estimated with

5 ±1
220 ± 59

Conductivity (mS/cm)
Ethylene Glycol
Glycerol
266 ± 24
531 ± 62

424 ± 83
575 ± 70

the Welch’s method (applied on a 10 s segment, exploiting a
Hamming window of 1024 samples, equivalent to 2 s, and 256
samples overlap). Compared to [19] and [32], a larger number
of points has been chosen, limiting the plot to the most interesting part of the spectrum for ECG recordings, where the largest
part of energy is represented. The frequency bins from zero
to 1 Hz have been cleared to zero in order to emphasize the
spectral components, otherwise towering over the other components producing an unreadable plot. This solution avoided any
spectral modification that could derive from the application of
digital filters to the signal before PSD computation, considering
that our recording unit has no high-pass stage (differently from
others setups in the literature, where analog or digital filtering
is used [30], [38]).
The quality of the signals acquired from the textile and
Ag/AgCl electrodes has also been evaluated in terms of QRS
complexes detection by using the Pan–Tompkins algorithm [39].
This is a simple and widely accepted real-time algorithm, based
on digital filtering with integer coefficients, generally used in
portable heart rate monitoring systems. It is available in several implementations (e.g., it is embedded in the PhysioToolkit
by PhysioNet [43]), and has been extensively validated on several international databases producing excellent results. Despite
Pan–Tompkins is not the best algorithm, compared to other QRS
detectors, by using the same detector on both the signals from
textile and Ag/AgCl electrodes, it is possible to have a fair evaluation of the electrodes quality. Such an approach is useful to
evaluate several signals, especially in dynamic condition [38],
providing a numerical value over the whole population.
In this case, the visual inspection and consequent manual
annotation of an expert was used as the ground truth, comparing
the performance of the same algorithm on the two signals for
every test. Annotation is performed analyzing contemporarily
all the readable channels, so that R peaks are annotated even
though not (well) visible in a part of that specific signal, but
clearly visible in the other one. No segments of a readable signal
have been removed from the analysis. All the signals with no
acceptable quality for any kind of QRS detection have been
marked as unreadable and completely discarded. This approach
is common to all the studies in the field of ECG waveform
delineation and event detection [37].
III. RESULTS
The effect on the conductivity of the second dopant and different affinity to the PEDOT:PSS treatment of the substrate
material has been measured and is presented in Table I. It can be

PANI et al.: FULLY TEXTILE, PEDOT:PSS BASED ELECTRODES FOR WEARABLE ECG MONITORING SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Impedance trend of dry textile electrodes (20 samples), evaluated on
subject 1 at different frequency values. The median impedance is the solid line,
the 25° percentile and the 75° percentile limit the shaded area, the dashed lines
span between the minimum and maximum values, not considered as outliers
(which are shown as red crosses).

Fig. 5. Boxplot of the electrode-skin contact impedances at 10 Hz: (a) dry
textile electrodes on subject 1, (b) dry textile electrodes on all the ten subjects,
(c) wet textile electrods on all the ten subjects.

clearly seen that polyester performs sensibly better than cotton.
In preliminary tests, we also observed that treated polyester fabrics were mechanically stronger and withstand better the sewing
than cotton, which becomes more fragile after treatment. Given
these results, only polyester electrodes treated with glycerol
were selected for impedance and ECG recordings.
The results of the evaluation on subject 1 of the skin contact
impedance for all the dry textile electrodes, with a sweep in
frequency between 20 and 250 Hz, are presented in Fig. 4. The
median impedance at 20 Hz is about 40 kΩ, with a clear decreasing trend in frequency and a noticeable good repeatability.
Such results are of the same order of magnitude of disposable
gelled Ag/AgCl electrodes.
As discussed in Section II-B, only the 10 Hz impedance has
been investigated with the ten enrolled volunteers, using the
FDA cleared meter. The results of the impedance module are
reported in Fig. 5, without any correction, so including the contribution of the skin-Ag/AgCl electrode, which is around 9.0 ±
2.6 kΩ (recalling they underwent the hardest skin preparation
and gel treatment to achieve the smallest impedance). Remarkably, the impedance distribution dispersion is quite high for the
dry textile electrodes, and considerably reduced for the wet ones.

545

Fig. 6. Five seconds excerpts of ECG signals acquired with dry and wet
electrodes (in blue, lower signals) compared to those simultaneously acquired
with gelled Ag/AgCl ones (in red, upper signals) during different activities.

Fig. 7. Rms around the isoelectric line of all the subjects for dry textile, wet
textile and Ag/AgCl electrodes for rest ECG.

However, for dry electrodes, this is mainly the consequence of
the intersubject skin differences (moisture, texture, composition, etc.) rather than a characteristic of the electrode. In fact,
all the electrodes tested at 10 Hz on the first subject present a
substantially lower dispersion with similar median values, as
depicted in Fig. 5.
The experimental setup also included the evaluation of the
textile electrodes in ECG signal acquisition using a different
electrode placement, as described in Section II, and applying for
the Ag/AgCl electrodes the same light skin treatment reserved
to the textile ones.
Fig. 6 presents, for a single subject (different from subject 1),
5-s excerpts of ECG signal during rest and dynamic conditions.
The Ag/AgCl electrodes show better stability of the baseline
compared to the dry textile electrodes, but worse than the wet
ones. Performance of wet and Ag/AgCl electrodes are similar, in
general, whereas dry textile electrodes reveal higher sensitivity
to high frequency noise.
For the evaluation of the signals at rest, we computed both
the rms around the isoelectric line and the PSD of the signal,
the former on the whole dataset of ten subjects and the latter on
one subject only. Fig. 7 shows the rms distribution for dry, wet,
and Ag/AgCl electrodes at rest. The isoelectric line segments,
between the end of a T wave and the beginning of the next P
wave, have been extracted and appended to obtain at least a 10 s

546

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

PSD for Ag/AgCl and dry/wet textile electrodes at rest.

signal for the rms evaluation. This corresponds to approximately
25 beats for a heart rate of about 66 bpm (e.g., for subject 1). It
is clearly visible that wet textile and Ag/AgCl electrodes have
a similar performance. Interestingly, the dispersion for the wet
electrodes is even lower.
Fig. 8 shows the PSDs of the signals at rest acquired from
subject 1, according to the method introduced in Section II-C.
The spectral content for Ag/AgCl and textile electrodes is quite
similar, particularly for the peaks corresponding to the T wave,
P wave and QRS complex. It is worth to note that no normalization has been computed, so the amplitude differences are due
to the different signal amplitudes. Dry textile electrodes show
strongest components at low frequencies than wet ones. Results
are similar to those presented by [38], where a different PSD
parameterization has been used along with a different positioning of the electrodes. The PSD trends of textile and commercial
electrodes are reasonably close, similarly to other studies in the
field [30]. Remarkably, the result for dry electrodes is comparable to that of gelled Ag/AgCl electrodes, meaning that the
proposed electrolyte-free approach is able to deal with ECG
signal acquisition even in dry conditions.
In order to evaluate the amount of baseline wandering artifact, it has been extracted from all the ECG recordings in the
different conditions, as explained in Section II-C. An example
with two different pairs of recordings on the same subject, with
dry and wet textile electrodes, is presented in Fig. 9. The standard deviation of this narrowband component of the signal has
been computed and synthetically represented in Fig. 10. Dry
textile electrodes confirm the well-known baseline wandering
problem, showing a larger dispersion of the standard deviation
distribution both at rest and during exercise. Conversely, wet
textile electrodes exhibit a similar behavior compared to the
Ag/AgCl ones.
Finally, the QRS detection analysis has been performed. The
results are reported in Table II for dry textile electrodes and
in Table III for wet textile electrodes in terms of number of
readable signals, sensitivity [S defined as TP/(TP + FN)] and
positive predictivity [P+ = TP/(TP + FP)]. TP is the number of
true positive, FP of false positive and FN of false negative. The

Fig. 9. Baseline wandering trend extracted through nonlinear filtering during
10 s of deep breathing. Ag/AgCl(1) is referred to the acquisition performed
simultaneously with dry textile electrodes; Ag/AgCl(2) to the case with wet
textile electrodes.

Fig. 10.

Standard deviation of the baseline wandering artifact.

TABLE II
QRS DETECTION RESULTS IN TERMS OF SENSITIVITY S AND POSITIVE
PREDICTIVITY P+ OVER TEN SUBJECTS FOR DRY TEXTILE ELECTRODES

Values in the shaded rows have been computed using all the signals readable in the Ag/AgCl
electrodes, whereas all the others have been computed on the signals readable with both
the electrodes.

number of readable records is itself an index of the performance
of the electrodes in terms of their ability in providing signals
that could be used for heart rate analyses.
Since for the dry textile electrodes not all the signals acquired during exercises where readable, two sets of S and P+
pairs have been considered to obtain a fair comparison between

PANI et al.: FULLY TEXTILE, PEDOT:PSS BASED ELECTRODES FOR WEARABLE ECG MONITORING SYSTEMS

TABLE III
QRS DETECTION RESULTS IN TERMS OF SENSITIVITY S AND POSITIVE
PREDICTIVITY P+ OVER TEN SUBJECTS FOR WET TEXTILE ELECTRODES

rest
breath
stairs
step

Type of electrode

# of readable records

# of beats

S%

P+ %

wet textile
Ag/AgCl
wet textile
Ag/AgCl
wet textile
Ag/AgCl
wet textile
Ag/AgCl

10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10

602

100
100
100
100
99,7
99,57
98,98
97,76

100
99,83
100
100
100
95,25
97,79
96,59

334
329
492

textile and Ag/AgCl electrodes. The first one has been computed taking into account only the signals in which both textile
and Ag/AgCl electrodes produced readable traces, the latter
considering the signals which were readable in at least one of
the acquired ECG (in this case, only in Ag/AgCl ones). In fact,
when the signal is not readable, the results in terms of sensitivity
and positive predictivity are not meaningful, since the detection
algorithm performs randomly. The results show the improvement due to wetting compared to dry condition, especially in
terms of number of records in which it is possible to perform
the QRS detection. Some subjects exhibit good quality signals
even for dry textile electrodes. This is not always correlated to
a low electrode-skin contact impedance, as could be figured out
instead. The performance of dry textile electrodes are unsatisfactory in dynamic conditions, and acceptable at rest or during
deep breathing, whereas wet textile electrodes show comparable or even better results than Ag/AgCl ones, especially during
exercise.
IV. DISCUSSION
Taking into account the low-cost and simple fabrication process, and the fact that this is the first attempt to realize this kind
of electrodes (to the best of our knowledge), these results are
very encouraging. Some further analyses on the achieved results
are provided hereafter.
A first consideration is related to a comparison with the
electrodes presented in [24], which are based on a similar
material and treatment. The conductivity of the fabrics achieved
in our study is more than five times better than the conductivity reported by [24] with silk threads (0.57 S/cm versus 0.1
S/cm). Electrode-skin contact impedance values cannot be directly compared because in [24] they are not referred to humans,
as in our case. Comparing our data with works that use the same
type of material (polyester fabric) and treatment (PEDOT:PSS
with sorbitol) but for other applications [40], our results are in
any case in line with what is expected for the procedure (0.22
S/cm versus 0.17 S/cm for the sorbitol-based treatment).
Even though biocompatibility studies should be carefully performed, biocompatibility of PEDOT:PSS electrodes is claimed
in previous works in the literature [22], supporting the present
application. Some issues could arise because of the potential
presence of EDOT monomers, known to be toxic to cells,
resisting the annealing process. Nevertheless, the use of a
high-quality commercial dispersion ensures a low concentra-

547

tion of these free monomers. Furthermore, since PEDOT:PSS
has shown to be thermally stable up to temperatures of 200 °C
[44], we can be quite confident that the annealing process does
not disrupt the polymer structure nor produce potentially toxic
byproducts.
Since the electrodes are handcrafted, the design is mainly
dictated by the need for reproducibility and manufacturability.
The size of the active area is comparable to that of other textile
electrodes presented so far (e.g., 9 cm2 in [17], 10 cm2 in [16],
up to 24 cm2 in [34]), even though someone present a reduced
area (e.g., 4.5 cm2 in [3] up to 64 mm2 for some advanced materials). Compared to commercial electrodes, even though there
are several smaller electrodes, some bigger ones also exist for
diagnostic ECG (e.g., Covidien H49P are about 14.4 cm2 ) and
others have comparable size (e.g., Covidien H59P are 8.4 cm2 ).
In terms of full electrode size, the commercial ones used in
this paper are far bigger, with a size of 43 mm × 45mm. The
size of the electrode has an obvious impact on the skin contact impedance, as occurs with the impedance of any other
conductive path when the transverse area is changed. Reducing the active area will then lead to decreasing the quality of
the recorded signal (attenuation, sensitivity to common mode
noise, etc.). However, a detailed study on this aspect is out of
the scope of this paper, mainly because of the manufacturing
problems arising when the electrode size is reduced. Such studies have been performed on sewed electrodes in [15], revealing
how small sizes affect the acquisition of the low-frequency components, but these results cannot be straightforward extended to
the present study because of the different material.
All the measurements aiming at evaluating the effectiveness
of the electrodes in sensing the electrophysiological signals have
been carried out on human volunteers. Such a testbed is widely
used in this field but, at the same time, it is questioned by
some researchers, rising doubts on the reproducibility of the
test scenarios. As a matter of fact, the properties of human
skin differ from person to person and can change, for the same
person, within hours [34] depending on the temperature and
skin humidity, and also from region to region, reflecting the
different skin composition [41]. Traditional metal-coated dry
textile electrodes reveal a strong capacitive behavior mitigated
by physiological (or artificial) skin wetting, resulting in a parallel conductive path [34]. Furthermore, the pressure exerted on
the skin affects the conductivity [3], [29], [34], and the same
holds for any electrode deformation (including stretch) due to
the anatomical site of application.
For this reason, the indications provided by Fig. 4 and in
the first box of Fig. 5 are more referable to the repeatability
of the fabrication process and to general characteristics than to
the precise assessment of the contact impedance on the human
skin. This is clearly visible looking at the different dispersions
in Fig. 5 for the dry electrodes (a condition in which the skin
properties differences are exacerbated). Nevertheless, roughly
speaking, these results compare well with other wearable electrodes in the literature. The impedance assumes a stable value
after a period of 5 to 15 min, similarly to other textile electrodes [19]. They perform better than those in [18], which are
not textile (polysiloxane loaded with conductive nanoparticles),

548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

taking into account that such electrodes use a general-purpose
electrolyte to provide the ion-conductivity. The results are also
comparable with those in [19], related to textile electrodes made
up of silver-coated polyester yarns. Such a similarity can be ascribed to the superficial characteristics of the textile electrodes,
which depends on the weft, so that they could be improved by
adopting nonwoven supports [23].
In some impedance tests over 48 h with our electrodes (data
not shown), we observed that they progressively got dry within
3 h (when wetted with two saline drops) and in 6 h (when wetted
with four saline drops). At that point, the impedance of the wet
electrode becomes very similar to that of the dry one. Periodical
wetting can be performed in some situations [12], keeping the
impedance low. The electrodes can also be suited for recording
during physical activities, since sweat has a positive impact on
the performance of textile electrodes [38] and wet electrodes
provided better performance than commercial ones when evaluated with the use of a QRS detector. Remarkably, none of the
volunteers reported adverse effects or complaints about the test.
Only the subject performing the 48 h test reported temporary
skin irritation and itch due to the belt (not to the electrodes).
Furthermore, the volunteers could not perceive any substantial
difference in terms of comfort when the electrode was wet,
compared to the dry condition. This result could be exploited
in some applications, as noninvasive fetal electrocardiography,
where the high number of electrodes and the adhesive support
cause substantial discomfort to the subject [45].
Results on ECG signal characteristics are also interesting,
even though the population size is limited. The significance of
such results is in any case limited because morphological analysis through in vivo comparison of different electrodes presents
severe limitations. In fact, a non-identical positioning of the
couples of electrodes for simultaneous recordings, as we did,
can lead to differences in recorded signals that are not imputable to the electrodes [15]. Even putting the electrodes
along the most probable cardiac axis direction can be cumbersome because of the variability of this parameter in different subjects [16]. Nevertheless, alternate measurements with
different electrodes in the same position can erroneously lead
to ascribe to the electrodes the morphological differences descending from the physio-pathological time variance of the ECG
waveform [15].
In dry conditions, the proposed electrodes are able to operate
correctly at rest. However, during physical exercise, artifacts
heavily affect their behavior. This is due to the contact with the
skin, which is not directly correlated to the active area of the
electrode but rather to the skin deformation in that point [3]
leading to an unstable electrode-skin contact [16]. It should be
also noted that, when used for the ECG recording, textile electrodes have been applied with a surgical TNT tape rather than
with the elastic band, because of the anatomical site, so that the
pressure on the skin is reduced and the electrode-skin contact
impedance grows. All these problems can be mitigated by the
adoption of a solid hydrogel membrane [30], [38], which is said
to be critical for a correct acquisition in dynamic conditions.
Remarkably, wet electrodes do not suffer this problem, leading
to results that are comparable or better than those of Ag/AgCl

electrodes and also to active textile electrodes [17], even during
dynamical tests. Being the wetting solution analog in composition to human sweat, it is predictable that, if the motion is
intense enough to induce a small quantity of sweat, also dry
electrodes can perform satisfactorily in dynamic conditions.
It is worth noting how the achieved results do not substitute an
accurate clinical validation of the electrodes, which will be performed in the context of an approved clinical trial. In fact, if the
aim is limited to the heart rate monitoring, the achieved results
are sufficient. However, this is not true for ECG morphology
analysis.
V. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the comparison between the developed novel
fully textile electrodes and the commercial ones has shown that
their performances are comparable or even better in wet conditions (both at rest and in motion) while in dry conditions the
results are comparable at rest but still worse in motion tests.
On the other hand, textile electrodes, during motion, are beneficially affected by the production of sweat by the subject, thus
indicating that they may be employed even in intense motion
activities. The results shown in this paper actually demonstrate
that the currently intended limits of textile electrodes may be
overcome by both improving the quality of the treatment of
textiles with conductive polymers (in contrast with what stated
in [3]), and by a careful design of the electrode configuration
(including suitable foam cushions aimed at keeping a constant
pressure on the skin without compromising the comfort of the
patient). Based on the promising results obtained on a significant number of healthy subjects, the future extension of this
technique for the monitoring of larger sets of patients, as well as
the application of these electrodes to the measurement of other
kinds of biopotentials (e.g., EEG) will be soon considered.
Furthermore, the good performance demonstrated in shortterm monitoring of ECG paves the way toward the integration
of the electrodes in smart garments for long-term monitoring.
Work is in progress to investigate other aspects related to the integration in wearables as, for instance, washability and garment
design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ms. E. Gusai for her collaboration with the experimental sessions, Dr. I. Spano for the
support with the anechoic chamber setup, and all the colleagues
who accepted to participate in the tests as voluntary subjects.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Lymberis and A. Dittmar, “Advanced wearable health systems and
applications - Research and development efforts in the European union,”
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 29–33, May/Jun. 2007.
[2] L. Su
et al., “12-lead Holter electrocardiography,” J.
Herzschrittmachertherapie + Elektrophysiologie, vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 92–96, Jun. 2013.
[3] G. Cho et al., “Performance evaluation of textile-based electrodes and
motion sensors for smart clothing,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 11, no. 12, pp.
3183–3193, Dec. 2011.

PANI et al.: FULLY TEXTILE, PEDOT:PSS BASED ELECTRODES FOR WEARABLE ECG MONITORING SYSTEMS

[4] A. Lymberis and S. Olsson, “Intelligent biomedical clothing for personal health and disease management: State of the art and future vision,”
Telemed. J. E-Health, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 379–386, 2003.
[5] M. Mansoor Baig et al., “A comprehensive survey of wearable and wireless ECG monitoring systems for older adults,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 51, pp. 485–495, 2013.
[6] M. Di Rienzo et al., “Textile technology for the vital signs monitoring
in telemedicine and extreme environments,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 711–717, May 2010.
[7] J. Coosemans et al., “Integrating wireless ECG monitoring in textiles,”
Sensors Actuators A: Physical, vol. 130–131, pp. 48–53, Aug. 2006.
[8] M. Di Rienzo et al., “Evaluation of a textile-based wearable system
for the electrocardiogram monitoring in cardiac patients,” Europace,
vol. 15, pp. 607–612, 2013.
[9] A. M. Bianchi et al., “Processing of signals recorded through smart
devices: Sleep-quality assessment,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 741–747, May 2010.
[10] M. Ishijima, “Unobtrusive approaches to monitoring vital signs at home,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 1137–1141, Nov. 2007.
[11] G. M. Paul et al., “A smart textile based facial EMG and EOG computer
interface,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 393–400, Feb. 2014.
[12] J. Löfhede et al., “Textile electrodes for EEG recording - A pilot study,”
Sensors, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 16907–16919, 2012.
[13] C.-T. Lin et al., “Novel dry polymer foam electrodes for longterm EEG measurement,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5,
pp. 1200–1207, May 2011.
[14] J. Crawford and L. Doherty, Practical Aspects of ECG Recording. Cumbria, U.K.: M&K Update Ltd., 2012.
[15] V. Marozas et al., “A comparison of conductive textile-based and silver/silver chloride gel electrodes in exercise electrocardiogram recordings,” J. Electrocardiology, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 189–194, 2011.
[16] T. Pola and J. Vanhala, “Textile electrodes in ECG measurement,” in Proc.
Intell. Sensors, Sensor Netw. Inf. Int. Conf., 2007, pp. 635–639.
[17] T.-H. Kang et al., “Nonwoven fabric active electrodes for biopotential
measurement during normal daily activity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 188–195, Jan. 2008.
[18] K.-P. Hoffmann and R. Ruff, “Flexible dry surface-electrodes for ECG
long-term monitoring,” in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Int. Conf., 2007,
pp. 5739–5742.
[19] M. M. Puurtinen et al., “Measurement of noise and impedance of dry and
wet textile electrodes, and textile electrodes with hydrogel,” in Proc. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2006, pp. 6012–6015.
[20] M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, “Wearable electronics and smart textiles: A
critical review,” Sensors, vol. 14, pp. 11957–11992, 2014.
[21] G. Mattana et al., “Organic electronics on natural cotton fibres,” Organic
Electron., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 2033–2039, Dec. 2011.
[22] D. Khodagholy et al., “NeuroGrid: Recording action potentials from the
surface of the brain,” Nature Neuroscience, vol. 18, pp. 310–315, 2015.
[23] T. I. Oh et al., “Nanofiber web textile dry electrodes for long-term biopotential recording,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
204–211, Apr. 2013.
[24] S. Tsukada, H. Nakashima, K. Torimitsu. (2012) “Conductive Polymer
Combined Silk Fiber Bundle for Bioelectrical Signal Recording,” PloS
One, vol. 7, no. 4, art. no. e33689, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033689.
[25] Y. M. Chi, J. Tzyy-Ping, G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact
biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 3, no. pp. 106–119, 2010. DOI: 10.1109/RBME.2010.2084078.
[26] R. Paradiso and M. Pacelli, “Textile electrodes and integrated smart textile
for reliable biomonitoring,” in Proc. 33rd Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2011, pp. 3274–3277.
[27] H. Okuzaki et al., “Highly conductive PEDOT/PSS microfibers fabricated
by wet-spinning and dip-treatment in ethylene glycol,” Eur. Polymer J.,
vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 256–261, Jan. 2009.

549

[28] S. Kim and S. Leonhardt, “Influence of contact pressure and moisture
on the signal quality of a newly developed textile ECG sensor shirt,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sensor Netw., 2008,
pp. 256–259.
[29] G. Paul et al., “The development of screen printed conductive networks
on textiles for biopotential monitoring applications,” Sensors Actuators A:
Physical, vol. 206, pp. 35–41, Feb. 2014.
[30] E. P. Scilingo et al., “Performance evaluation of sensing fabrics for
monitoring physiological and biomechanical variables,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 345–352, Sep. 2005.
[31] H. Carvalho et al., “Health monitoring using textile sensors and electrodes: An overview and integration of technologies,” in Proc. Med. Measurements Appl. Int. Symp., Jun. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[32] C. R. Merritt et al., “Fabric-based active electrode design and fabrication
for health monitoring clothing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol.
13, no. 2, pp. 274–280, Mar. 2009.
[33] T. Vuorela et al., “Design and implementation of a portable long-term
physiological signal recorder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 718–725, May 2010.
[34] L. Beckman et al., “Characterization of textile electrodes and conductors,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 31, pp. 233–247, 2010.
[35] G. D. Clifford et al., “Signal quality indices and data fusion for determining clinical acceptability of electrocardiograms,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 33,
pp. 1419–1433, 2012.
[36] J. M. Łeskia and N. Henzel, “ECG baseline wander and powerline interference reduction using nonlinear filter bank,” Signal Process., vol. 85,
no. 4, pp. 781–793, Apr. 2005.
[37] J. P. Martı́nez et al., “A wavelet-based ECG delineator: Evaluation
on standard databases,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 4,
pp. 570–581, Apr. 2004.
[38] R. Paradiso et al., “A wearable health care system based on knitted
integrated sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 337–344, Sep. 2005.
[39] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[40] Y. Ding et al., “Conductivity trends of PEDOT–PSS impregnated fabric
and the effect of conductivity on electrochromic textile,” ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 1588–1593, Jun. 2010.
[41] T. Sunaga et al., “Measurement of the electrical properties of human skin
and the variation among subjects,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, pp. N11–N15,
2002.
[42] P. Kligfield et al., “Recommendations for the standardization and interpretation of the electrocardiogram: Part I: The electrocardiogram and
its technology: A scientific statement from the American heart association electrocardiography and arrhythmias committee, council on clinical
cardiology; the american college of cardiology foundation; and the heart
rhythm society,” Circulation, vol. 115, pp. 1306–1324, 2007.
[43] A. L. Goldberger et al., “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet:
Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,”
Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, Jun. 2000.
[44] S. Kirchmeyer et al., PEDOT: Principles and Applications of an Intrinsically Conductive Polymer. New York, NY, USA: CRC Press, 2011, pp.
123–125.
[45] D. Pani et al., “An advanced algorithm for fetal heart rate estimation
from non-invasive low electrode density recordings,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1621–1636, Aug. 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

