512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Ultrasound-Based Detection of Fasciculations
in Healthy and Diseased Muscles
Peter John Harding∗ , Ian D. Loram, Nicholas Combes, and Emma F. Hodson-Tole

Abstract—Involuntary muscle activations are diagnostic indicators of neurodegenerative pathologies. Currently detected by invasive intramuscular electromyography, these muscle twitches are
found to be visible in ultrasound images. We present an automated
computational approach for the detection of muscle twitches, and
apply this to two muscles in healthy and motor neuron diseaseaffected populations. The technique relies on motion tracking
within ultrasound sequences, extracting local movement information from muscle. A statistical analysis is applied to classify the
movement, either as noise or as more coherent movement indicative of a muscle twitch. The technique is compared to operator
identified twitches, which are also assessed to ensure operator
agreement. We find that, when two independent operators manually identified twitches, higher interoperator agreement (Cohen’s
κ) occurs when more twitches are present (κ = 0.94), compared
to a lower number (κ = 0.49). Finally, we demonstrate, via analysis of receiver operating characteristics, that our computational
technique detects muscle twitches across the entire dataset with a
high degree of accuracy (0.83 < accuracy < 0.96).
Index Terms—Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), computational analysis, diagnostics, image processing, ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
OTOR neuron disease (MND) is a neurodegenerative
disease which affects 2–3 per 100 000 people per year
in the U.K. [1]. Diagnosis is based on the clinical observation
of symptoms, including progressive weakness and wasting of
muscles across several body regions [2]. Diagnostic certainty is
expressed in terms of levels of probability and can be increased
through the investigation of lower motor neuron function and
indicators of chronic neurogenic change. Unstable or dying motor neurons fire intermittently, leading to involuntary activation
of the group of muscle fibers they innervate, these events are
defined as fasciculations [3]. Ongoing denervation results in the
involuntary activation of individual fibers, these events are defined as fibrillations [4]. The activation of individual or groups
of fibers results in localized twitches occurring in the muscle,
which may be detected during a diagnostic examination. Both
events can be found in healthy muscle, but greater numbers or

M

Manuscript received June 5, 2015; revised July 18, 2015; accepted July 26,
2015. Date of publication August 5, 2015; date of current version February 16,
2016. The work of E. F. Hodson-Tole was supported by a Sir Henry Wellcome
Postdoctoral Fellowship under Grant WT085599MA. The work of P. J. Harding
was supported by the Dalton Research Institute. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ P. J. Harding is with the Cognitive Motor Function Research Group, School
of Healthcare Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester M15
6HB U.K. (e-mail: p.harding@mmu.ac.uk).
I. D. Loram and E. F. Hodson-Tole are with the Manchester Metropolitan
University.
N. Combes is with the Royal Preston Hospital.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2465168

distinctive patterns are diagnostic indicators of neurodegenerative disease [5].
A. Techniques for Detection of Involuntary Activation
In clinical practice, fasciculations and fibrillations are identified using electromyography (EMG), which detects action potentials (electrochemical changes in the muscle fiber membrane)
resulting from activation. This typically involves inserting a needle electrode into the muscle of interest. For a diagnosis of the
MND, fasciculation and fibrillation potentials must be detected
across several body regions [6], so multiple needle insertions are
required. The process is invasive and painful. In addition, the
electrode detects activity in a small portion of muscle, meaning
that many events in the muscle will not be detected. Alternatively, single and multichannel array electrodes can be placed
on the skin to detect action potentials. This increases the volume
of muscle which can be scanned, but it is limited to superficial
muscle and is influenced by the distance between the muscle
and the detecting electrode(s).
Ultrasound imaging (US) has been proposed for the detection
of localized tissue movement, resulting from muscle activation
during a fasciculation or fibrillation [4], [7]. US provides a noninvasive means of assessing muscle, enabling larger volumes of
muscle, or multiple muscle layers to be assessed at once. US
imaging has shown to be highly sensitive to movement, with
movements as small as 5 μm detectable [8], and most current
machines can image at a temporal resolution of over 80 frames/s.
US has previously been shown to be more sensitive than intramuscular EMG for detecting fasciculations in the tongue, biceps
brachii (BB), and tibialis anterior, increasing the proportion of
patients diagnosed with MND [7]. It was found that US identifies fasciculations in 80% of examinations (71/89) compared
to a 45% detection rate with intramuscular EMG (40/89 examinations) [9]. A further study reports that US is more sensitive
than EMG when applied to muscles which were clinically unaffected at the time of assessment [10]. Given the rapid physical
deterioration which can occur with MND, early diagnosis is important for providing patients with appropriate care plans, and
recruitment to clinical trials. The importance of detecting fasciculations in the early stages of the disease process has recently
been highlighted [6], and interest in US image-based clinical assessment of muscles is growing, with calls for the development
of prospective evaluation trials [11].
B. Steps Toward the Computational Analysis
of Ultrasound Images
Studies of the application of US to the detection of involuntary
muscle activation have only evaluated manual visual assessment

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HARDING et al.: ULTRASOUND-BASED DETECTION OF FASCICULATIONS IN HEALTHY AND DISEASED MUSCLES

513

by evaluating visual identifiers of fasciculations by comparing
manual and computational methods of analyzing US images
(the dashed pathway in Fig. 1). Specifically we provide: 1) evaluation of interoperator differences in manual identification of
muscle twitches; 2) a method for computational analysis of US
images to provide automated detection of muscle twitches; 3)
comparison between computational and manual identifications.
II. METHODS
A. Data Collection
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of sources of information bring combined
to inform computational image analysis approaches. The assessment of visual
techniques of detecting muscle twitches (Red, short dashed lines) are denoted
by the pathway with the dashed line. In the future, myoelectric signals should be
considered (Blue, large dashed lines). By combining different truth signals we
are optimally placed to evaluate proposed computational analysis approaches,
even where no single modality can reliably provide a “ground truth” signal.

of image sequences to determine the presence of fasciculations
or fibrillations. These reports find acceptable intra- and interoperator reliabilities [4], [12], this approach limits the objective information gained from image sequences. Extracting more
detailed information on the timing, duration, or frequency of
the muscle twitches is time consuming and likely to introduce
larger intra-/interoperator error and bias. Additionally, indicators of neurogenic change, e.g., fibrillations firing less than five
times/s, which can be detected using EMG are not visible to
human operators in US images [4], potentially contributing to
reports that EMG is more sensitive than US for the detection
of fibrillations [10]. It is clear that both EMG and US have disadvantages. No single modality currently provides details of all
events which have occurred within a muscle or group of muscles
during a given period of time.
There have been limited attempts to apply computational
analysis approaches to the automated detection of muscle
twitches in US, focusing on the identification of externally
triggered muscle events [13]. This included the application of
feature tracking across US sequences, with subsequent investigation of the sensitivity and specificity of mutual information
(MI) and susceptibility metrics for the detection of electrically
evoked muscle twitches in healthy individuals. Computational
analysis will improve the value and application of this imaging
modality as an objective diagnostic aid. Specifically, such approaches facilitate the extraction of quantitative information on
muscle twitches, improving clinical diagnosis and monitoring,
reducing the requirement for operator training, demands on operator time, and the potential for bias and errors. Evaluating the
performance of any developed approach is complicated by the
difficulties in defining a ground truth signal to compare results
against. In such instances, development of a suitable computational approach needs to be evaluated through comparison with
other available signals. This process is represented in Fig. 1,
where signals from different EMG and manual observation of
images can be compared and combined to develop best practice
for sensitive, accurate, and timely identification of the occurrence of fasciculations and fibrillations. This process begins

US sequences were collected from two groups: 1) 20 healthy
participants (10 female, 33 ± 13 years, 172 ± 8.6 cm, 73 ± 21.8
kg), recruited from the general population; and 2) Five participants who had been diagnosed with MND (two female, time
since diagnosis: 3–18 months, 61.7 ± 15.7 years, 170.67 ± 6.03
cm, 75.33 ± 14.74 kg), recruited through the Motor Neuron Disease Care and Research Centre at the Royal Preston Hospital. All
participants provided informed, written consent, and the study
was approved by Ethics committees at Manchester Metropolitan
University and Preston Royal Hospital.
In healthy participants, US sequences were collected (75
frames/s) from two muscles: the BB in the upper arm and the
medial gastrocnemius (MG) in the lower leg. These muscles
were chosen as they differ in the body region they are located,
size and geometric characteristics (see Fig. 2) representing a
range of properties found in muscles investigated during clinical examination. When studying BB, participants seated with
their left arm placed in a slightly extended, supported, and relaxed position. The linear probe (7 MHz, 59 mm field of view,
LogicScan 128, Telemed Ltd., Vilnius, Lithuania) was coated in
acoustic gel and positioned to provide a clear longitudinal view.
When studying MG, participants lay prone on a treatment couch,
with their legs fully extended. The US probe was placed over the
mid-muscle belly region of left MG. Participants remained as
still as possible during collection of two 40-s trials. Where there
was an obvious voluntary contraction, the data were deleted
and the trial was repeated. The sequence in which muscles were
studied was randomized in each participant. In MND-diagnosed
participants, US images were also collected from BB and MG.
Two 30–40 s sequences were recorded, using the same device
outlined previously, with the probe held in place over the muscle
of interest by an operator.
B. Operator Identification of Muscle Twitches
Operator identification of muscle twitches in collected US
provides an expert truth signal, consisting of the frame number at
which each twitch was identified as starting. Two operators, with
over 11 years combined experience, independently screened all
US. Each sequence was viewed on a frame-by-frame basis using video editing software (VirtualDub 1.10.4). Muscle twitches
were defined as localized displacement of tissue and were, as reported in previous studies [9], easily distinguishable from other
phenomena such as arterial pulsation (repeated, rhythmic displacements) and voluntary activation (movement of the whole
muscle). Once a twitch had been identified, the operator closely

514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the flow of work. US was collected from each muscle across two groups of participants. US was assessed by two observers
who noted the frame in which involuntary twitches began. US was also analyzed using MI to quantify characteristics of the movement patterns in tracked features.
ROC are used to assess the accuracy of MI against operator observed events; Observer A only, Observer B only, A ∪ B, and A ∩ B.

This process resulted in a boolean vector, the same length as
each video sequence, with true values representing each frame
where a muscle twitch had been identified.
C. Computational Identification of Muscle Twitches

Fig. 3. Number of elements in A ∩ B and A ∪ B as the interframe difference
is increased. The plateau point can be seen at approximately five frames.

screened frames around the time of initiation to identify the first
frame in which tissue displacement was apparent. Operators did
not report issues with voluntary activations being present in the
data, although it is accepted that low-level sustained contraction
may be difficult to identify (particularly in BB).
To assess the correctness and level of agreement between
operators, the operator assessments were combined in several
ways. Alongside the “raw” operator datasets, A and B, the
intersection (A ∩ B), and union (A ∪ B) of the data were determined. To calculate the intersection of datasets, operators were
classified as being “in agreement” over the presence of a muscle
twitch when they had identified the twitch within five frames of
each other. This figure was selected pragmatically, and represents the lowest interframe difference for which the sets A ∩ B
and A ∪ B were insensitive to changes in interframe interval
(see Fig. 3). Where discrepancies in frame number occurred
between operators, within the five frame tolerance, the mean
was used. Duplicated identifications in the union of data were
removed using the same method.

1) Tracking Muscle Tissue Displacements: The muscle
tracking used here converts still images into vector grids approximating the movement between two consecutive images,
the instantaneous movement identified at that image region between frames N and N + 1. The method employed for the detection of involuntary twitches are based on the Lucas–Kanade
(LK) feature tracking algorithm [14], shown to accurately track
movement within US images [13], [15]. Traditionally, a “first
pass” of the image is made to identify features within the image
that are mathematically superior for tracking, usually corner
features are used, but previous work has shown that these are
not effective for US images [15]. Therefore, an evenly spaced
grid of features were used (grid size 100 × 80). The feature list
is then stored as a set of feature templates, denoted as T (x, y),
where x and y represent the position of the templates’ center
pixel.
Using the same feature list throughout the analysis, an iterative search for each feature template from frame N is performed
in frame N + 1 to find its position in the new image I(x, y).
At each iteration, the difference in intensity of T (x, y) and
I(x, y) is calculated (ΔI), alongside the sums of the previous
and current, horizontal, and vertical gradients which are used
to estimate the error in both the x- and y-planes. The starting
position for the search is updated according to these values, and
Newton–Raphson iterations continue until the feature has net

HARDING et al.: ULTRASOUND-BASED DETECTION OF FASCICULATIONS IN HEALTHY AND DISEASED MUSCLES

515

Fig. 5. Normalized output from an experiment on healthy subjects MG, showing the MI and observed fasciculations. Observed fasciculations were independently verified by two assessors. Parameters used were; truth signal (A ∪ B),
π
β |m | = 2, β m
 = 2 , and k = 5.
Fig. 4. Changes in accuracy values as the window factor (k) is increased,
shown against all possible human generated truth signals; Op A and Op B
(twitches identified by operator A or B), Int (twitches identified by both operator
A and B), and Un (twitches identified by either operator A or B).

movement of less than n pixels or ΔI becomes so great that the
new region cannot be said to be the same feature. All features are
replaced at every frame (using the original featurelist), ensuring
an equal number of features for every tracking step.
Data obtained from each feature at every frame of the LK
tracking are as follows; x and y (position of each feature, in
pixels), and m
 (the feature’s last movement vector).
The LK implementation used during this paper was a custom
built, compute unified device architecture (CUDA) parallelized
tracker. Parameters used during all analyses in this study were
F = 8000 features, a feature window of 25 × 25, and minimum
1
pixel.
movement of n = 10
2) MI: The technique employed for the detection of fasciculations is MI, a statistical measure of the interdependence of two
signals. This converts the 2-D grid of movement vectors, representing the movement between two frames, into a 1-D signal.
The magnitude of the MI signal represents the likelihood of that
US image transition containing a muscle twitch. We hypothesize
that the magnitude of all feature movement (|m|) in images from
quiet muscle would be small, mostly caused by the speckle noise
present in all US images. As speckle noise is pseudorandomly
distributed, the direction of movement m
 caused by this noise
will also present randomly. Therefore, we suggest that under
circumstances where there is no coherent movement, the interdependence of the magnitude and the direction of any feature
movement would be unrelated and independently distributed.
In contrast, during sequences where a muscle twitch is present,
the magnitude of feature movement around that twitch would
be greater, and the direction of movement more uniform and coherent. In short, the magnitude and the direction of movement
within the local area surrounding a muscle twitch would be far
more structured and more predictable.
The MI of |m| and m,
 denoted by M I(|m|; m),
 yields a
measure of the amount of information gained about the value
of m
 if the value of |m| is known and vice-versa. This means
that, if all movements of specific magnitudes were all in the
exact same direction then M I(|m|; m)
 → ∞, and if |m| and m

were entirely independent then M I(|m|; m)
 → 0. Therefore,
we hypothesize that, by calculating the interdependence of these
movement characteristics, it is possible to differentiate between

low-level noise and the involuntary twitch behavior we wish to
identify.
MI is defined as:

P (|m|i , m
 j)
(1)
M I(|m|; m)
 =
P (|m|i , m
 j ) log2
P (|m|i )P (m
 j)
i,j
where P (|m|i , m
 j ), P (|m|i ), and P (m
 j ) are the joint and individual probability distributions of |m| and m.
 As these probability distributions are discrete, there is some calibration required to
find optimum discretization values for the continuous variables
m
 and |m|, see Section III.
After application of the MI analysis, we are left with a 1-D
signal, the magnitude of which represents the likelihood that a
muscle twitch had occurred, see Fig. 5.
Each experiment run consisted between 2400 and 3000
frames of US, but the duration of a muscle twitch in US images
(≈ 0.5 ± 0.11 s) [16] is significantly greater than the temporal
difference between frames (0.012 < τ < 0.013 s). In the MI,
muscle twitches were represented over multiple frames, rather
than the single time points provided by the manual identification. Assuming that greater values of MI are indicative of muscle
twitches, any potential twitch must present as a “peak.” Leading
from this, the “start” and “end” of the twitch were respectively
identified as the first point before and the first point after the
peak which lay below the noise threshold. The noise threshold
was taken as the signal mean/trial.
The result of the entire MI analysis process is a discrete set
of possible muscle twitch events, each having a start frame, end
frame, and magnitude.
D. Evaluation
To assess agreement between two independent observers, the
κ statistic was employed. A κ statistic is a means of assessing the
level to which two or more classifiers (human, computational,
etc.) agree upon the classification of certain data. The meaning of
the κ value is described in terms of five ranges: Slight 0.0 ≤ κ <
0.2, fair 0.2 ≤ κ < 0.4, moderate 0.4 ≤ κ < 0.6, substantial
0.6 ≤ κ < 0.8, almost perfect 0.8 ≤ κ ≤ 1.0 [17].
Receiver operating characteristics (ROC), commonly used to
assess the accuracy of binary classifier systems, were used to
compare the MI signal to the human generated truth signal. In
the present analysis, the human identified twitches were used
to create four different truth signals: 1) twitches identified by

516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

operator A, 2) twitches identified by operator B, 3) twitches
identified by both operators (A ∪ B), and 4) twitches identified
by either operator (A ∩ B).
To calculate the ROC, peaks whose boundaries encompassed
a manual identification of a twitch were counted as true. If there
was no corresponding manual identification within the duration
of the peak, the peak was counted as false. See Fig. 5, for
example, MI and operator IDs. The accuracy, as reported for
the entirety of this paper, is defined as the area under an ROC
curve.

TABLE I
CHANGES IN MI DISCRETIZATION PARAMETERS AND THE RESULTING ROC
ACCURACY, WHEN COMPARED TO OPERATOR IDENTIFICATION IN BB (TOP)
AND MG (BOTTOM)
β |m | pixels

βm


c

III. CALIBRATION
To enable the parametrization of the image analysis approaches, data from a subset of five, arbitrarily chosen, healthy
participants were selected to provide a calibration dataset (two
female). These data were used for the calibration of the MI and
the window factor only and do not form part of the test data nor
are they included in the final results. Only data from healthy
participants were used for this purpose, to retain the maximum
size of the clinical population dataset.
A. Window Factor
US images are known to exhibit noise, and during a motion
tracking task the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) may be very small.
The SNR may be increased by dropping the temporal resolution
of the US stream (effectively changing the frame rate), this amplifies the movement between two frames, but has little effect on
noise. We term the distance between tracked frames as the window factor, and calibration tests were carried out to investigate
whether increases in the window factor could be used to improve
the SNR. Rather than tracking features from frame N → N + 1,
multiple tracking targets are used. Features selected in frame N
are stored, and were tracked into k subsequent frames. These
metrics are analyzed to investigate the effects of window factor
on ROC accuracy across both muscles and population groups.
Values of k were tested up to a total of k = 25, approximately
0.30–0.33 se of real time, and the accuracy of classification
against each truth signal were recorded, see Fig. 4.
The window size k was shown to have a large effect on data
recorded from MG, with values of ≈ 0.8–0.9 for k ≤ 3 before
rising to 0.9 at k ≥ 5. In comparison, k has little effect on the
BB data. For the purposes of the work presented here k = 5 is
used for all further analysis.

π
8
π
4
π
2
π

8

4

2

1

0.7566

0.8941

0.8770

0.8039

0.8445

0.9095

0.9095

0.8445

0.8039

0.8770

0.8770

0.8770

0.9629

0.8941

0.8770

0.8770

β |m | pixels

βm


c

π
8
π
4
π
2
π

8

4

2

1

0.6162

0.6927

0.6749

0.6779

0.6765

0.6972

0.7129

0.6990

0.6321

0.7295

0.8108

0.8050

0.6605

0.7301

0.7244

0.7653

and βm
 = π provided the greatest accuracy, while in MG β|m | =
π
2 and βm
 = 2 was optimum.
These calibration values are physiologically meaningful, as
they can be directly related to the structure of the two different
muscles. The fascicles in the BB are arranged in parallel, i.e.,
they run longitudinally along the muscle, meaning the contraction and relaxation of fibers would occur horizontally across
US images. This change is unlikely to be viewed directly, but
the overall expansion of the muscle, which would primarily
present vertically would. Evidence of this can be seen in the optimal calibration parameter βm
 = π, which in effect classifies
all movement into either toward or away from the probe, disregarding horizontal movement in the image. The fascicles in the
MG however are pennate, i.e., attached obliquely, so they appear
diagonally in the US image, this means that contractile movement presents both vertically and horizontally. Again, evidence
π
of this can be seen in the calibration parameter βm
 = 2 , which
would take into account both horizontal and vertical movements
in the US images.
The values stated here are the discretization values used for
all further calculations presented in this paper.
IV. RESULTS

B. Discretization of MI Parameters

A. Interoperator Agreement

Discretization of the speed |m| and direction m
 of feature
movement was tested across multiple values to find an optimum point at which the difference between quiet and twitch
behavior could be distinguished. As the constraint on feature
movement per frame was limited to 16 pixels, the following
bin sizes were assessed: β|m | ∈ {8, 4, 2, 1}, and the same for
π π π
βm
 ∈ { 8 , 4 , 2 , π}.
Results from this analysis of images collected from BB and
MG are shown in Table I. For the assessment of BB data β|m | = 8

The interoperator agreement across the dataset was found to
be generally high, with a distinct positive trend between the
number of twitches present per experiment and the resulting
agreement between operators. Statistics on interoperator agreement can be seen in Table II.
We see that the muscles and population groups where twitches
were most prevalent show the highest agreement between operators; this is in contrast to the low agreement in the BB of the
healthy population, where twitches were rare. Differences in

HARDING et al.: ULTRASOUND-BASED DETECTION OF FASCICULATIONS IN HEALTHY AND DISEASED MUSCLES

517

TABLE II
STATISTICS ON OPERATOR IDENTIFICATION OF MUSCLE TWITCHES, (A ∩ B)
WAS CALCULATED USING AN INTER-FRAME DIFFERENCE OF FIVE FRAMES
Healthy

A
B
A ∩B
κ

MND

BB

MG

BB

MG

36
40
17
0.49

116
151
102
0.76

169
183
167
0.94

156
151
139
0.85

the number of twitches identified by each operator were found,
with the more experienced operator A classifying more twitches
overall, but with just two operators there is insufficient data to
draw significant comparisons.
The occurrence of muscle twitches was found to be greatly
different across both the healthy and MND populations, and
the BB and MG muscles, which can be seen by analyzing the
union (A ∪ B) of the two operator IDs. The average occurrence of muscle twitches in the healthy dataset was found to
be: MG (x̄ = 0.12 s−1 , σ = 0.15 s−1 ) and BB (x̄ = 0.03 s−1 ,
σ = 0.04 s−1 ). The average occurrence of muscle twitches
in the MND dataset was found to be: MG (x̄ = 0.54 s−1 ,
σ = 0.30 s−1 ) and BB (x̄ = 0.56 s−1 , σ = 0.52 s−1 ). We see
from this that the mean occurrence of muscle twitches in the
pathological MG data was nearly five times greater than in
the healthy muscle, while the BB showed that pathological
muscle exhibited greater than 18 times more muscle twitches
than the healthy cohort. We believe this to be because the MG
muscles are far more likely to exhibit nonpathological fasciculations, leading to the difference between healthy and MND
affected muscle to be less pronounced.
B. Healthy Population
The agreement between observer identification of twitches in
healthy participants differed between the two muscles studied
(see Table II). The MG showed the best agreement (κ = 0.76),
categorized as substantial agreement. Agreement between operators for BB was lower (κ = 0.49), categorized as moderate.
The number of muscle twitches in the MG and BB differed
greatly, with 76 twitches identified in the BB, whereas 267 were
identified in the MG (see Table II).
When evaluating the agreement between observer identified
muscle twitches and MI, the accuracy again differed between
muscles, but also between truth signals (see Figs. 2 and 6).
The differences between the two observers when analyzing the
healthy data were more pronounced. Comparison against A had
the better accuracy in each muscle (BB 0.94; MG 0.91), while
B showed lower agreement (BB 0.93; MG 0.89).

Fig. 6. ROC curves for all muscles, across both populations, showing single
and combined operator identification performances (A, B, A ∪ B, and A ∩ B).
Accuracy values presented in figure legends.

Fig. 7.
bined.

ROC curves produced when healthy and affected groups were com-

differences did occur between the two muscles with the greatest
agreement in BB (κ = 0.94) compared to (κ = 0.85) in MG.
When evaluating the agreement between observer identified
muscle twitches and the MI metric, few differences were observed between the muscles studied and the truth signal (see
Fig. 2). In all cases the highest accuracy occurred in the BB
muscle. Using individually identified events (A ∪ B) provided
a marginally higher agreement than either set of individual observations.
D. Combined Data
Comparison of MI and the intersection (A ∩ B) in both
healthy and affected participants is shown in Fig. 7. Accuracy in
both muscles was high, slightly better in BB (0.96 versus 0.92).

C. MND Affected Participants
Both observers identified greater numbers of involuntary muscle twitches in image sequences recorded from BB and MG
in MND affected participants (see Table II, note N = 5 versus
N = 15 for affected and healthy participants, respectively). The
agreement was classified as almost perfect (κ > 0.8), although

V. DISCUSSION
This paper has met three key objectives: 1) evaluation of operator agreement in the identification of muscle twitches, 2) a
computational method for the detection of muscles twitches,
and 3) comparison between manual and computational twitch

518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

identification. Across the whole dataset, κ statistics revealed
almost perfect agreement between the two operators (see Table II). The highest level of agreement occurred in the clinical
population, where the largest number of twitches were present.
The poorest agreement was in the BB of healthy participants,
where the lowest number of twitches were identified. Agreement
appears to be strongly influenced by the number of twitches
present in the data being analyzed, fewer twitches corresponding to lower agreement in all cases.
Previous work evaluating interoperator agreement reported
a figure of κ = 0.84 for two operators viewing data from 317
muscles across 13 patients [12]. It did not provide insight into
the variation of agreement across muscles studied or how agreement between operators was defined (i.e., on the basis of individual twitch events or presence/absence of twitches). The only
other work which evaluates operator agreement focuses on the
identification of fibrillations in collected images [4]. Therefore,
agreement was influenced by operator experience, with more experienced operators having greater agreement (κ ≈ 0.63–0.67)
than the least experienced (κ ≈ 0.22–0.55). This study only determined the presence or absence of fibrillations, ignoring more
objective measures (e.g., number of events, rate of occurrence,
morphology of twitches) which could provide valuable diagnostic and monitoring information [6]. Future work will investigate
whether this information may be automatically extracted from
US images. Such measures have previously been time consuming, with analysis of each video from healthy and affected participants presented here taking approx. 300–400 and 660–850 s,
respectively. Our results, coupled with those of others [4], suggest that a detailed assessment of both the training requirements
for, and sensitivity of, manual screening is imperative if US is
to progress as a diagnostic tool for neurodegenerative disease.
We presented the first automated approach for the detection
of involuntary muscle twitches via US. Comparison of MI with
manual identification of twitches revealed a high level of classification accuracy (see Fig. 6). The results confirm the potential
of computational analysis as a means of objectively determining the occurrence of fasciculations. MI was selected for testing
based on our previous study with electrically evoked muscle
twitches [13] and we have shown it to be an effective detector of
the smaller, involuntary activations; part of current diagnostic
criteria [6].
The agreement found between manual and computational validates the MI approach as a diagnostic tool, but further study
is required to determine the wider application of this approach.
Consideration of more muscles, as clinical tests screen muscles
across multiple body regions (e.g., upper/lower limbs, trunk,
head, and neck). Finally, truth signals are required for the evaluation of algorithms. Future work will include collection of
EMG to evaluate accuracy. This protocol will enable investigation of the potential to automatically detect/classify other involuntary activation events (e.g., fibrillations, or complex repetitive
discharges) and enable determination of the optimal combination of assessment approaches for diagnosis. The potential to
characterize other features of muscle twitches (e.g., spatial and
temporal features) should not be overlooked, as it will provide
additional information for diagnosis and monitoring of disease

progression, of particular value for the development of new
therapeutic interventions.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have shown that the computational analysis of US images provides a means of automatically detecting involuntary
activations in muscles of both healthy and MND affected individuals. MI-based analysis of tracked LK image features shows
strong potential as an approach to provide automated objective
measures from US images. Further work is however required
to determine its efficacy across a wider range of muscles and
such work should also consider potential application of other
analysis approaches.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Bourke et al., “Non-invasive ventilation in MND: Current UK practice,”
ALS MND: Off. Publication World Federation Neurology, Res. Group
MND, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 145–149, 2002.
[2] M. de Carvalho et al., “Electrodiagnostic criteria for diagnosis of ALS,”
Clin. Neurophys., vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 497–503, 2008.
[3] S. Pillen et al., “Muscle ultrasound in neuromuscular disorders,” vol. 37,
pp. 679–693, 2008.
[4] S. Pillen et al., “Muscles alive: Ultrasound detects fibrillations,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 120, no. 5, pp. 932–936, 2009.
[5] J. a. Costa et al., (Nov. 2012). Awaji criteria for the diagnosis
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:a systematic review. Archives Neurol. 69(11), pp. 1410–6. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/22892641
[6] M. de Carvalho and M. Swash. (2013). Fasciculation potentials
and earliest changes in motor unit physiology in ALS. J. Neurol., Neurosurg., Psychiatry [Online]. 84(9), pp. 963–968. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23418210
[7] S. Misawa et al., “Ultrasonographic detection of fasciculations markedly
increases diagnostic sensitivity of ALS,” J. Neurol., vol. 77, no. 16,
pp. 1532–1537, 2011.
[8] I. D. Loram et al., “Use of ultrasound to make non-invasive in vivo measurement of continuous changes in human muscle contractile length,” J.
App. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 1311–1323, 2006.
[9] I. M. P. Arts et al., “Muscle ultrasonography: A diagnostic tool for ALS,”
Clin. Neurophys., vol. 123, no. 8, pp. 1662–1667, 2012.
[10] A. Grimm et al., “Muscle ultrasonography as an additional diagnostic tool
for the diagnosis of ALS,” Clin. Neurophys., vol. 126, no. 4, pp. 820–827,
2015.
[11] M. Swash and M. de Carvalho, “Muscle ultrasound detects fasciculations
and facilitates diagnosis in ALS,” Neurology, vol. 77, no. 16, pp. 1508–
1509, 2011.
[12] C. D. Reimers et al., “Fasciculations: Clinical, electromyographic, and
ultrasonographic assessment,” J. Neurol., vol. 243, no. 8, pp. 579–584,
1996.
[13] P. J. Harding et al., “Automated detection of skeletal muscle twitches
from b-mode ultrasound images,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit., 2012, pp. 2630–2633.
[14] B. D. Lucas et al., “An iterative image registration technique with an
application to stereo vision,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 1981,
vol. 81, pp. 674–679.
[15] R. Cunningham et al., “Automated measurement of human skeletal calf
muscle contraction via b-mode ultrasound imaging,” presented at the 17th
Int. Conf. Medical Imaging, Understanding Analysis, Birmingham, U.K.,
2013.
[16] F. O. Walker et al., “Sonographic imaging of muscle contraction and
fasciculations: A correlation with electromyography,” Muscle Nerve,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 33–39, 1990.
[17] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer agreement
for categorical data,” Biometrics, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 159–174, 1977.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

