506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

A Feedback Control Approach to Organic Drug
Infusions Using Electrochemical Measurement
Mark H. Myers∗ , Yaqin Li, Francine Kivlehan, Ernö Lindner, and Edward Chaum

Abstract—Goal: Target-controlled infusion of anesthesia is a
closed-loop automated drug delivery method with a computeraided control. Our goal is to design and test an automated drug
infusion platform for propofol delivery in total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) administration. Methods: In the proposed method,
a dilution chamber with first-order exponential decay characteristics was used to model the pharmacodynamics decay of a drug. The
dilution chamber was connected to a flow system through an electrochemical cell containing an organic film-coated glassy carbon
electrode as working electrode. To set up the feedback-controlled
delivery platform and optimize its parameters, ferrocene methanol
was used as a proxy of the propofol. The output signal of the sensor was connected to a PI controller, which prompted a syringe
pump for feedback-controlled drug infusion. Results: The result
is a bench-top drug infusion platform to automate the delivery
of a propofol based on the measurement of concentration with
an organic film-coated voltammetric sensor. Conclusion: To evaluate the performance characteristics of the infusion platform, the
propofol concentration in the dilution chamber was monitored with
the organic film-coated glassy carbon electrode and the difference
between the set and measured concentrations was assessed. The
feasibility of measurement-based feedback-controlled propofol delivery is demonstrated and confirmed. Significance: This platform
will contribute to high-performance TIVA application of intravenous propofol anesthesia.
Index Terms—Pharmacokinetics (PK), propofol, proportionalintegral-derivative (PID) controller, target-controlled infusion of
anesthesia (TCIA), total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA).

I. INTRODUCTION
ARGET-CONTROLLED infusion of anesthesia (TCIA)
is a widely used method for propofol delivery in general
anesthesia and sedation [1], [2].
TCIA is based on well-established pharmacokinetic (PK)
and pharmacodynamic (PD) models [1]–[4] utilizing patient
biometric data. The effectiveness of TCIA relies on the
accuracy of the PK model, the performance characteristics

T

Manuscript received May 1, 2015; revised June 17, 2015; accepted July 26,
2015. Date of publication August 5, 2015; date of current version February 16,
2016. This work was supported by the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology
Research Center at the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command
under Award W81XWH-05-2-0064, Award W81XWH-10-1-0358, and Award
W81XWH-13-C-0099, and in part by the research grants from the Tennessee
Technology Development Corporation, an unrestricted UTHSC departmental
grant from Research to Prevent Blindness (New York, NY, USA), and the Plough
Foundation (Memphis, TN, USA). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. H. Myers is with the Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163 USA (e-mail: mhmyers99@
gmail.com).
Y. Li and E. Chaum are with the University of Tennessee Health Science
Center.
F. Kivlehan and E. Lindner are with the University of Memphis.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2464771

of the device, which is utilized for monitoring the drug,
and the correlation between the measurement and effect site
concentrations.
The United States Food and Drug Administration have not
approved TCIA using a propofol due to the lack of adequate
monitoring equipment and concerns related to the narrow therapeutic window of propofol. To achieve actual control instead of
“targeted” control, the concentration of propofol has to be measured continuously during total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA).
Recently, our group has developed an electrochemical sensor
for continuous monitoring of propofol in complex biological
solutions, including whole blood [9]–[12]. It has been shown
that the performance characteristics [13] of the propofol sensor (precision, accuracy, response time, etc.) are sufficient for
feedback-controlled closed-loop propofol delivery, i.e., TCIA.
To characterize the drug concentration and dynamics in
the human circulatory system, a canonical three-compartment
model has been used [3], [4]. The first compartment represents
the volume of blood; the second compartment characterizes the
rapidly perfused tissues, such as heart, lung, and liver; while
the third compartment represents the slowly perfused tissues
like fat, muscle, and peripheral organs. The model describes
the intracompartment and intercompartment equilibria. When
a drug is introduced into the blood (first compartment) via a
bolus injection or by continuous drug infusion, the drug concentration in the different compartments, including the effect site
(brain), is affected by the distribution rate constants between interacting compartments. Other factors that affect concentration
of the drug in the individual compartments include the physical volumes of the compartments, the drug infusion rate, and
the various interactions between the drug, plasma proteins, and
tissues.
The objective of TCIA using a propofol is to set the propofol
concentration at the effect site to a targeted level. However,
both the introduction and the measurement of the drug are in
blood (first compartment). Pharmacodynamic models offer the
possibility of estimating the concentration at the effect site from
the drug concentration in blood.
Once the drug concentration can be measured in real time
in the first compartment, it can also be adjusted to a required
value. In a closed-loop system, the drug delivery (infusion) rate
is adjusted to set the blood or effect site concentration to a target
concentration level. We have designed and tested a bench-top
drug infusion platform to automate the delivery of propofol
based on the measurement of propofol with an organic filmcoated voltammetric sensor.
In the current clinical practice, bolus injection of propofol
is the standard protocol in the operating room. Following the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MYERS et al.: FEEDBACK CONTROL APPROACH TO ORGANIC DRUG INFUSIONS USING ELECTROCHEMICAL MEASUREMENT

507

bolus injection, the dynamics of drug elimination in the blood
circulation can be described mathematically by a first-order
kinetics model
dC (t)
= −kC (t) .
(1)
dt
According to this model, the concentration decays exponentially in time
C (t) = C(t0 )e−k t

(2)

where C(t) is the time-dependent concentration; C (t0 ) is the
drug concentration at t = t0 after the bolus injection, and k is
the drug elimination rate. The elimination rate is a function of
the volume of blood V (mL) and the PK decay rate.
When the bolus injection of the drug is pumped into the first
compartment at an infusion rate of I (t) (mol/s), (1) is modified
as
1
dC(t)
= −kC (t) + I(t).
(3)
dt
V
In our experiments, the PK decay is modeled by the exponential decay of concentration in a constant volume dilution
chamber, and the elimination rate constant k is described as
ω
k=
(4)
V1
where V1 (mL) is the volume of the dilution chamber acting
as the first compartment, and ω (mL/s) is the flow rate of the
dilution.
When a certain amount of the drug (C0 V0 ) is injected into
the dilution chamber, its concentration in the chamber rises to
C1 (0) = C0 V0 / (V0 + V1 ) and decays exponentially from this
initial concentration of C1 (0) with a rate determined by ω and
V1
C1 (t) = C1 (0) e− V 1 t .
ω

(5)

The dynamics of the concentration of the first compartment
C1 (t) can also be represented in the derivative form as
dC1 (t)
ω
= − C1 (t) .
dt
V1

is a noise in the measurement signal and disturbances in the
ambient environment.
II. METHODS
A. Materials
Ferrocene methanol (FcMeOH) was supplied by Sigma
Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). FcMeOH solutions were prepared in pH ∼7.2 phosphate buffer saline (PBS: 0.1 M KH2 PO4,
0.1 M K2 HPO4, 0.1 M KCl). The pH of the buffer was
set by 0.45-M NaOH. The PBS buffer was used as a background electrolyte in all electrochemical measurements. A 2,
6-Diisopropylphenol (propofol) was purchased from Sigma
Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and was prepared as a 10-mM
stock solution in 0.1-M NaOH, which was diluted to a 1-mM
secondary stock solution in the PBS. The aqueous solutions were
prepared with deionized water provided by a Milli-Q Gradient
A10 System (Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA, USA).
B. Instrumentation

(6)

When the injection of the drug as a bolus is coupled with continuous infusion I (t) , the time-dependent concentration change
in the dilution chamber can be described as
ω
dC1 (t)
1
= − C1 (t) + I(t).
dt
V1
V1

Fig. 1. Experimental setup for testing the feedback-controlled delivery of
propofol.

(7)

In this study, a classical proportional-integral-derivative (PID)
control strategy is applied to drive a syringe pump for feedbackcontrolled infusion of organic-based drugs. One practical challenge in the control system implementation is the existence of
a noise. Therefore, a robust PID control design in the presence
of disturbance and noise is of practical importance. In [14] and
[15], an output feedback controller design approach is applied to
achieve a robust PID control for motor-driven systems with disturbance and noise attenuation. In our study, the output feedback
controller is designed using the transfer function of the PK-PD
dynamic process to achieve the robust performance when there

The feedback-controlled monitoring system is shown in
Fig. 1. It consisted of: 1) a dilution chamber with first-order
exponential decay characteristics; 2) a flow through an electrochemical cell to monitor the drug concentration in the dilution
chamber; 3) a syringe pump for feedback-controlled drug delivery; 4) and a PID controller to drive the syringe pump to
maintain the desired drug concentration.
The dilution rate in this study was set by a programmable peristaltic pump (Gilson Minipuls3). For the feedback-controlled
delivery of the drug (ferrocine methanol or propofol), a syringe
pump (World Precision Instruments, SP210iw) was utilized. For
recording the current signal of the membrane-coated propofol
sensor, a CH Instruments 842B potentiostat was used.
C. Electrochemical Cells
The electrochemical measurements were performed in an
electrochemical flow cell (MW-5052) utilizing an MF-1000
dual glassy carbon (GC) working electrode (both 3 mm

508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

diameter). The flow cell was purchased from Bioanalytical Systems (BASi, West Lafayette, IN, USA http://www.basinc.com/).
In the BASi flow cell, an Ag|AgCl|3.0-M NaCl served as the reference electrode, while the stainless steel housing of the thinlayer BASi flow cell served as the auxiliary counter electrode.
The MF-1000 electrode block was first polished with 0.05-mm
alumina slurry, rinsed and sonicated in deionized water, and
dried. The MF-1000 electrode block was used without modification in the preliminary tests with FcMeOH. However for
the measurement of propofol, it has been spin coated with an
approximately 1-μm-thick plasticized PVC membrane [9]. The
flow cell was assembled by placing a 0.002 thick Teflon gasket
between the MF-1000 electrode block (or the PVC membranecoated electrode block) and the stainless steel auxiliary electrode. Before the measurements, the sensor was conditioned by
running the pH ∼7.2 PBS buffer through the sensor cell for
10 min.
D. Procedures
To test the performance characteristic of the feedbackcontrolled drug delivery platform, first FcMeOH was used as
a proxy of the propofol. FcMeOH concentration in the dilution
chamber was assessed by chronoamperometry (CA) using the
MF-1000 GC electrodes in the MW-5052 flow cell. FcMeOH
can be reversibly oxidized on the GC electrode (0.35 V) without
electrode fouling. Following the refinement of the PID system,
the GC electrodes were spin coated by a plasticized PVC membrane, loaded with an organic electrolyte and ion exchanger,
and the feedback-controlled delivery was tested with propofol
as a target analyte. The rate of response of the membrane-coated
sensor is significantly slower than that of the uncoated GC electrodes. For the CA measurement of propofol, 1.2 V was applied
to the membrane-coated working electrode.
The real-time signal of the electrochemical sensor was used
as a feedback input for the PID controller to adjust the rate
of drug delivered by the syringe pump to approach the preset
targeted concentration of the drug in the dilution chamber.
1) Calibration of the Sensors: Ferrocene methanol and
propofol concentrations of the solution were gradually increased
by injecting aliquots of FcMeOH or propofol standards at 3-min
intervals into a continuously stirred PBS background solution.
The parameters of the linear relationship between the measured
current (ic ) and the concentration (C) were determined by the
linear regression. Uncoated-sensor blocks were used for the
ferrocene methanol measurements, while the MF-1000 sensor
block was spin coated with ∼1-μm-thick plasticized PVC membrane for measuring propofol as described previously [11]. The
plasticized PVC membrane coating provides an adequate detection limit (DL < 1 μM) and selectivity for the sensor and
prevents it from biofouling [11].
2) Exponential Dilution: The experimental setup used to simulate the concentration decay in a single-compartment model is
shown in Fig. 1. A beaker with a given volume represents the
first compartment, which is also called dilution chamber. The
liquid volume (V1 ) inside the beaker is held constant. The content of the beaker is continuously diluted by steady flow (ω) of

PBS into the beaker. Equation (5) describes the concentration
change inside the beaker from an initial concentration.
To mimic the PK decay, the dilution chamber can be tuned
by varying the volume of the chamber (V1 ) and the dilution rate
(ω). The dilution rate in this study was set by a programmable
peristaltic pump (dilution pump) using a background buffer.
The peristaltic pump was set at a constant revolution per minute
(r/min). A constant solution level in the dilution chamber was
set via the combination of a suction pump and tube. The inlet
of the suction tube was set to the desired solution level, while
the other end of the suction tube was attached to the suction
pump. The flow rate of the suction was always faster than the
dilution flow rate, which prevented the solution level to rise
above the inlet of the suction tube. The content of the chamber
was recirculated with an additional pump, which transported
the fluid through the electrochemical flow cell for continuous
concentration measurement. For each pump described in the
Fig. 1, the following flow rates are calculated based on the tube
gauges of the system: 0.04 mL/s for the dilution, 0.0483 mL/s
for the volume level control, and 0.0016 mL/s for the sensor
chamber influx. For the feedback-PID-controlled delivery of
the drug (FcMeOH or Propofol), a syringe pump was utilized.
The potentiostat was used to record the current signal of the
working electrode. Labview 2013 (32-bit) was used to develop
the PID controller application.
III. RESULTS
A. Open-Loop System
An open-loop approach is applied in order to understand the
system dynamics. The open-loop system is described in two
steps. In the first step, we observe the system dynamics, i.e.,
record the exponential concentration decay from an initial concentration C1 (0) over time by pumping background electrolyte
into the constant volume dilution chamber. In the second step,
with the continuous dilution running in the background, the analyte (FcMeOH or propofol) is dosed into the dilution chamber by
an infusion pump until the flow system reaches infusion-dilution
equilibrium, and a steady-state concentration is recorded.
In the first step of the open-loop experiment, the exponential decay of the dilution chamber is quantified. The volume
of the dilution chamber was set to 10 mL, and FcMeOH with
an initial concentration of 0.01 mM was diluted by pumping
background electrolyte into the chamber at 0.04-mL/s flow rate.
The measured and expected concentration transient is shown
in Fig. 2. The parameter of the fitted exponential function are
in perfect agreement with the expected value (k = ω/V1 =
0.04 mL/s/10 mL = 0.004 s−1 ) in theoretical computation using (4) and (5):
C1 (t) = 0.01e−0.004t .

(8)

In the second step of the experiment, the open-loop gain of
the system is to be identified and validated. The theoretical value
of the steady-state gain can be obtained from (7).
When dC1 (t)/dt = 0, the system reaches the steady state,
and the open-loop gain G = C1 (t)/I(t) can be calculated as
the ratio between the concentration value C1 (t) and the infusion

MYERS et al.: FEEDBACK CONTROL APPROACH TO ORGANIC DRUG INFUSIONS USING ELECTROCHEMICAL MEASUREMENT

509

TABLE I
SINGLE-COMPARTMENT SIMULATION

Fig. 2. Experimentally recorded concentration decay (blue line) of 0.01-mM
FcMeOH in a 10-mL dilution chamber by diluting at 0.04 mL/s. The parameters
of the fitted exponential curve (black line) are in perfect agreement with their
expected values.

Variable

Description

Value

I(t)
C1
Target
V1
ω
k

Infusion rate
Concentration of first compartment
Desired concentration of first compartment
Volume of first compartment
Dilution pump speed
Elimination rate k = Vω

PID calculated infusion rate
Time variant
0.038 mM
10 mL
0.04 mL/s
0.004 s−1

1

mM/L FcMeOH is injected into the dilution chamber by setting
the syringe pump at five different infusion speed from 0.10
to 0.30 mL/min. The infusion speed of the syringe pump in
milliliter per minute is translated into the drug infusion rate of
micromole per second for consistency with the unit used in the
theoretical calculation in (9).
The theoretical value of the open-loop gain in (9) matches its
experimentally determined value, as shown in Fig. 3.
The idea of steady-state gain can be used to determine a required infusion rate for a given steady-state concentration, e.g.,
for a steady-state target concentration of 0.038 mM/L, an infusion rate of 0.0016 μM/s should be applied. In our experimental
setting, when the syringe pump is filled with an input solution
at the concentration of 0.7 mM/L, it is equivalent to setting the
syringe pump speed at 0.137 mL/min.
B. PID Parameters

Fig. 3. Steady-state concentrations of FcMeOH measured in the dilution
chamber at different infusion rates, with a constant (0.04 mL/s) dilution rate.
The top x-axis represents setting the infusion pump speed in mL/min, while the
bottom x-axis represents the calculated infusion rate in μM/s. The linear ratio
obtained through curve-fitting matches the theoretical value in (9).

rate I(t), as follows:
G=

1
1
C1 (t)
1
=
= 25 s/mL.
= =
I(t)
kV1
ω
0.04 mL/s

(9)

At the start of the second step of the open-loop experiment, the
concentration of FcMeOH in the same 10-mL volume dilution
chamber was set to zero, and parallel to the “dilution” FcMeOH
was pumped into the chamber at a constant infusion rate. After
a certain period of time, the rate of infusion of FcMeOH into
the chamber and the rate of elimination of FcMeOh by dilution
becomes equal and the system reaches the steady state. For a
given dilution rate, the steady-state concentration value depends
on the rate of infusion. Given the dilution rate of 0.04 mL/s
as shown in Fig. 2, we measure experimentally the open-loop
gain of the system by varying the infusion rate of the syringe
pump, and observe the corresponding concentration after the
open-loop system reaches steady state. In Fig. 3, we show an
experimentally recorded steady-state concentrations when a 0.7-

Using the parameters of the open-loop model, we designed
a controller for the closed-loop system to yield a targeted concentration. To mimic conditions in the operating room during
propofol anesthesia, we considered conditions when a target
concentration should be set by initiating a bolus injection. Following the bolus injection, the concentration increases instantaneously, and then, decays exponentially in time as a consequence
of constinuous dilution. Once the concentration drops below the
targeted concentration, the PID controller actuates the infusion
pump in real time at an infusion rate according to the difference between the target concentration and the measurement,
and restore the dilution chamber to the target concentration.
A PID controller consists of a proportional control term (KP ),
an integral control term (KI ), and a differential control term
(KD ). The following equations describe the three components
of the PID controller:
e (t) = Target − C(t)



I(t) = KP e(t) + KI

(10)
t

e (t) dt + KD
0

de(t)
.
dt

(11)

The digitized representation of the PID controller as illustrated in [16] is used in our controller design and software implementation. The open-loop dynamics in (7), together with the
PID controller as described in (10) and (11), provides a complete
mathematical description of the closed-loop flow system experiment. The specific set of parameters used in our experiment
implementation is demonstrated in Table I.

510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 4. PI parametrization is accomplished through the controller tuning in the
experiments. The target concentration is marked as a solid gray line. Parameters
applied are shown Table II.

TABLE II
PID PARAMETERS

Fig. 5. Comparison of ferrocene methanol concentration from measured
(black), and calculated (dash-dotted gray) concentration data using mathematical model (7) with parameters used in both the experiment and model from
Table I. The target concentration is marked as a solid gray line.

TABLE III
STEADY STATE AND RMSE (FERROCENE METHANOL CONCENTRATION)

PID Parameter

KP

KI

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

3 000 000
6 000 000
750 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000
4 500 000

55
55
55
5.5
55
550
5500
55 000
5 50 000

The mathematical model enables the characterization of the
closed-loop system with the feedback controller. PID tuning was
used to identify a proper set of PID parameters (KP , KI , KD ).
In our PID tuning, we found that the proportional gain in the PID
controller (KP ) appeared to have the greatest influence on the
controller by setting the gain initially before adjusting KI and
KD , while the influence of KD on the system was negligible.
In our experimental setup, a PID controller is actuated after the
classical clinical approach of bolus injection is administered,
and there is a negligible fluctuation of the drug concentration, the
derivative component in (11) is essentially zero; therefore, a PI
controller is sufficient for the feedback control of drug infusion.
In the parameter tuning, the influence that KP and KI have on
the signal is observed on how fast the concentration dynamics
approach the target in transient, and how close the concentration
approaches target in steady state, as shown in Fig. 4. The overall
impact of PI parameters can be approximated quantitatively via
root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the measured concentration
to the target.
The parameter set based on our PID tuning was identified as a
PI controller with KP = 4.5 × 106 and KI = 55, based on the
single-compartment simulation parameters in Table I [5]–[8].
The signal of the electrochemical sensor was recorded during
the closed-loop experiment with the PI controller engaged. Setting the PI controller using parameter 5 in Table II, seven runs

Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Steady-State Error

RMSE Target

3.12%
6.06%
7.84%
7.03%
7.47%
2.25%
0.12%

11.26%
9.26%
21.29%
14.01%
16.11%
9.46%
14.00%

of the closed-loop flow system were recorded, and the average
of the recorded runs is shown in Fig. 5.
The closed-loop experiments demonstrate that the PI controller is adequate for maintaining a desired target concentration
and the concentration transient is in agreement with the mathematical simulation. A performance evaluation of the closed-loop
system is performed for each individual experiment and the results are demonstrated in Table III. The steady-state error was
calculated by taking an average of the last 200 points of the time
series for each experiment. The difference between the target
and measured concentration at steady state was between 0.12%
and 7.84% (see Table III).
The RMSE between the experiment and the target is calculated by taking the entire controller execution time series into
consideration.
One of the practical challenges in the control system implementation is the existence of the noise in the measurement
signals. The noise also contributes to the RMSE between the
experiment run and the target. In our flow system experiment,
the noise originates majorly from two sources: First, while simulating of the blood circulation using a dilution pump, the tubing
flow of the system occasionally induces bubbles, which causes
a higher electric resistance, resulting in a smaller current measurement value; second, perturbation from the oxidation process
in the electrochemical cell could also be incorporated into the
measured current signal as a noise. There is also an ambient

MYERS et al.: FEEDBACK CONTROL APPROACH TO ORGANIC DRUG INFUSIONS USING ELECTROCHEMICAL MEASUREMENT

TABLE IV
STEADY STATE AND RMSE (PROPOFOL CONCENTRATION)
Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Steady-State Error

RMSE Target

2.34%
2.45%
3.01%
3.36%
13.31%
5.16%
6.68%

19.93%
39.89%
6.30%
31.11%
16.32%
29.06%
33.10%

noise from the environment. The impact of noises in our control system is mitigated at their root causes. To minimize the
effervescence in the flow system, we degas the solution for
15 min before each experiment. To reduce the noise from the
electrochemical unit, the sigma-delta AD converter inside the
potentiostat functions as an integrating device that helps to filter the electrochemical noise. A low-pass Butterworth filter is
applied to mitigate the ambient noise when necessary.
Previously, FcMeOH was used to test the PI controller. We
performed a separate set of experiments using the membranecoated biosensor with propofol following the protocol of sensor calibration, open-loop system characterization [6], [7], and
closed-loop experimentation. The experimental results are also
compared with the target for the steady-steady error and RMSE,
whereas the difference between the target and measured concentration at steady state was between 2.34% and 13.31% (see
Table IV).
IV. DISCUSSION
The experiments performed using a continuous flow system
demonstrate the effectiveness of the PI control strategy in targeting and maintaining the level of both FcMeOH and propofol
in vitro. In the experimental implementations with FcMeOH
shown in Table III and implementations with propofol shown in
Table IV, the closed-loop system demonstrates asymptotically
stable behavior, eventually approaching the target at the steady
state, as seen in the percentage steady-state error.
The mean values of the experiments in Tables III and IV support the idea that the quality of feedback control of propofol was
similar to FcMeOH. In Table III, the experiment (RMSE target)
operates within a 13.63% ± 4.23% average error. The controller is designed to achieve a low steady-state error, whereas
the steady-state error of the output of the system has an average error of 4.84% ± 3.00%, which demonstrates that the
controller can maintain the desired target concentration. In Table IV, propofol was used to determine how the controller would
perform utilizing an anesthetic drug. The RMSE of the output
of the system with respect to the targeted concentration (RMSE
target) yielded a higher average error from all the experiments
of 25.10% ± 11.49%. This value is higher than the ferrocene
methanol experiments in part due to the membrane coating of
the GC sensor [12]. The average steady-state error is in the same
range of the ferrocene methanol experiments 5.19% ± 3.91%.
The propofol concentration remained stable due to the steady
rate of small infusions.

511

The experimental results validated our approach of applying
a feedback control through the infusion of an analyte using the
signal obtained from the electrochemical sensor and maintaining
the targeted concentration over time.
V. CONCLUSION
Simulation of a closed-loop PI-controlled delivery of organic
molecules, including propofol, using an experimental flow system model and electrochemical biosensor shows promising capability to propofol delivery. The small steady-state error of the
system between the two analytes demonstrates that the controller
can be applied to a broad spectrum of organically based drugs.
This suggests the feasibility of the flow system model approach
in simulating PK-PD models for automated clinical drug delivery, specifically in the TIVA application of intravenous propofol
anesthesia.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Smith and P. F. White, “Types of intravenous anaesthesia,” in Total
Intravenous Anaesthesia. London, U.K.: BMJ Publishing Group, 1998,
pp. 22–24.
[2] I. Smith and P. F. White, “Intravenous anaesthesia delivery and monitoring systems,” in Total Intravenous Anaesthesia. London, U.K.: BMJ
Publishing Group, 1998, pp. 98–127.
[3] B. Marsh, et al., “Pharmacokinetic model driven infusion of propofol in
children,” Brit. J. Anesthesia, vol. 67, pp. 41–48, 1991.
[4] T. W. Schnider et al. “The influence of method of administration and
covariates on the pharmacokinetics of propofol in adult volunteers,” Anesthesiology, vol. 5, pp. 117–1182, May 1998.
[5] S. Passot et al., “Target-controlled versus manually-controlled infusion of
propofol for direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy,” Anesthsia Analgesia,
vol. 94, pp. 1212–1226, May 2002.
[6] M. Enlund, “TCI: Target controlled infusion, or totally confused infusion? Call for an optimized population based pharmacokinetic model for
propofol,” Upsala J. Med. Sci., vol. 113, no. 2, pp. 160–170, 2008.
[7] K. van Heusden et al., “Design and clinical evaluation of robust PID
control of propofol anesthesia in children,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 491–501, Mar. 2014.
[8] R. De Keyser and C. Ionescu, “A no-nonsense control engineering approach to anaesthesia control during induction phase,” in Proc. 8th IFAC
Symp. Biol. Med. Syst., 2012, vol. 8, pp. 379–384.
[9] J. Langmaier
et al., “Electrochemical quantification of 2,6diisopropylphenol (propofol),” Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 704, pp. 63–
67, Oct. 2011.
[10] F. Rainey et al., “Toward feedback controlled anesthesia: Automated flow
analytical system for electrochemical monitoring of propofol in serum
solutions,” Electroanalysis, vol. 26, pp. 1295–1303, Apr. 2014.
[11] F. Kivlehan et al., “Toward feedback-controlled anesthesia: Voltammetric measurement of propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) in serum-like electrolyte solutions,” Anal. Chem., vol. 84, no. 18, pp. 7670–7676, Sep. 2012.
[12] F. Kivlehan et al., “Propofol detection and quantification in human blood:
The promise of feedback controlled, Closed-loop anesthesia,” Analyst,
vol. 140, pp. 98–106, Oct. 2014.
[13] A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods. Fundamentals
and Applications, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[14] H. ZHang et al., “Robust H  PID control for multivariable networked
control systems with disturbance/noise attenuation,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control, vol. 22, pp. 183–204, Jan. 2012.
[15] H. Zhang et al., “Robust static output feedback control and remote PID
design for networked motor systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 58,
no. 12, pp. 5396–5405, Dec. 2011.
[16] C. L. Phillips and T. H. Nagle, Digital Control System Analysis and Design,
3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1994.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

