530

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

An Early Clinical Study of Time-Domain Microwave
Radar for Breast Health Monitoring
Emily Porter∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Mark Coates, and Milica Popović, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This study reports on monthly scans of healthy patient volunteers with the clinical prototype of a microwave imaging
system. The system uses time-domain measurements, and incorporates a multistatic radar approach to imaging. It operates in
the 2–4 GHz range and contains 16 wideband sensors embedded
in a hemispherical dielectric radome. The system has been previously tested on tissue phantoms in controlled experiments. With
this system prototype, we scanned 13 patients (26 breasts) over
an eight-month period, collecting a total of 342 breast scans. The
goal of the study described in this paper was to investigate how the
system measurements are impacted by multiple factors that are
unavoidable in monthly monitoring of human subjects. These factors include both biological variability (e.g., tissue variations due
to hormonal changes or weight gain) and measurement variability (e.g., inconsistencies in patient positioning, system noise). For
each patient breast, we process the results of the monthly scans to
assess the variability in both the raw measured signals and in the
generated images. The significance of this study is that it quantifies
how much variability should be anticipated when conducting microwave breast imaging of a healthy patient over a longer period.
This is an important step toward establishing the feasibility of the
microwave radar imaging system for frequent monitoring of breast
health.
Index Terms—Biomedical monitoring, cancer detection, microwave antenna arrays, multistatic radar.

I. INTRODUCTION
REAST cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in
women, and is responsible for over 40 000 deaths per year
in the United States alone [1]. Early detection of breast cancer is
vital to successful treatment. The five-year survival rates underscore the importance of early diagnosis: When a breast tumor is
diagnosed at a localized stage of growth, the five-year survival
rate is 99%; when the cancer is only identified after metastasis,
the survival rate decreases to 24% [1]. The standard screening
technique for breast cancer is X-ray mammography, but there is
significant motivation for developing a complementary modality. X-ray mammography requires the use of ionizing radiation
which limits the allowable frequency of scans, involves dis-

B

Manuscript received November 24, 2014; revised June 18, 2015; accepted
August 5, 2015. Date of publication August 7, 2015; date of current version
February 16, 2016. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Le Fonds de recherche du Québec - Nature et technologies, and Partenariat de recherche orientée en microélectronique,
photonique et télécommunications. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ E. Porter is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 0E9 Canada (e-mail:
emily.porter @mail.mcgill.ca).
M. Coates and M. Popović are with McGill University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2465867

comfort and pain due to breast compression, and suffers from
relatively poor sensitivity and specificity, especially for women
with dense breast tissues [2]. Microwave methods have been
suggested as a potential technology that could help to address
these shortcomings. Microwave techniques are based on a reported inherent contrast in the dielectric properties (the relative
permittivity and conductivity) of healthy and malignant breast
tissues over the microwave frequency range [3].
Microwave breast screening and imaging modalities typically fall into one of two categories: tomography or radar. In
microwave tomography, the resultant image is a dielectric profile of the tissues within the breast. Microwave radar maps the
dielectric scatterers within the breast. Radar methods are less
computationally complex, but they do not provide the dielectric
properties of the breast that may be of interest. Microwave techniques can be based on measurements in the frequency or in the
time domain, with the latter encountered less frequently. Both
frequency- and time-domain experimental systems have been
reported in the literature, but only a few have been tested on
patients [4]–[9]. Notably, in [8], a monostatic radar system was
used to obtain microwave images of eight patients, with results
compared to their mammograms or magnetic resonance images. Although not all lesions were detected successfully, many
were and the microwave images were consistent with known
clinical data. Further, microwave imaging was used to monitor
the progress of a tumor during chemotherapy in [9]. A tomographic imaging system was used to collect data from more than
500 patient exams, eight of which are studied in [9]. The authors suggest that dielectric property changes are in line with
tumor progression and that the overall success of treatment can
be predicted after as little as 30 days.
In this study, we test a time-domain microwave radar system for the application of breast health monitoring. We choose
time-domain measurements because they may offer advantages
over frequency-domain measurements, specifically, faster scan
times [10] and more cost-effective measurement devices. Such
a microwave monitoring system could be used to scan healthy
women on a regular basis. Then, current scans are compared
to past scans to identify any irregularities in the breast tissues.
The hope is that regular scanning can lead to earlier detection
for a higher percentage of the population. Our proposed breast
monitoring system is intended for monitoring (healthy) women
at high-risk of developing breast cancer, but it could also be
used to track the progress of post-treatment therapies.
Our system, initially presented in [11], contains 16 wideband
sensors embedded in a hemispherical “cup” in which the breast
is placed. In [12] and [13], we presented initial results with data
from a small number of patients. Further, in a study presented

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PORTER et al.: EARLY CLINICAL STUDY OF TIME-DOMAIN MICROWAVE RADAR FOR BREAST HEALTH MONITORING

in [14], we conducted breast scans of one patient daily over
the span of one month, and compared them to scans taken in
the same manner with a heterogeneous breast tissue phantom
of known and stable dielectric properties. Each day, the phantom was repositioned in the radome, to mimic the patient’s daily
breast repositioning. Despite the repositioning, the phantom data
were highly consistent over all measurement days. In contrast,
the patient data exhibited significant variability, suggesting that
patient-related changes, possibly due to tissue variations, were
detected. Finally, in prior work we also demonstrated successful imaging of tumors when the phantom, which included a
skin layer, was repositioned in the ultrasound immersion within
the radome between each scan, as would occur in a patientmonitoring scenario [15].
In this study, we report on microwave monitoring of healthy
patients using the time-domain radar system. We present and
examine an expanded clinical dataset obtained as follows. We
performed multiple breast scans on 13 women (26 breasts) over
an eight-month period. Thus, we have emulated a monitoring
scenario in which the women undergo regular breast scans. To
our knowledge, no similar dataset was previously reported for
a microwave breast imaging system applied to healthy patients.
This study has several added challenges when compared to the
one presented in [14], mainly attributed to working with multiple patients instead of one. For example, different volumes of
immersion medium were required for each patient, and since the
conducted study spanned a longer period of time, it was necessary to replace the immersion medium gel between patient
visits.
The primary goal of this study was to determine how much
variability should be anticipated when conducting microwave
breast imaging of a healthy patient over a longer period. We
explore how the system perceives the changes that occur due
to the monthly intervals. These changes are due to a combination of factors including both biological variability (e.g., tissue
variations due to hormonal changes or weight gain) and measurement variability (e.g., inconsistencies in breast positioning,
system noise). Although we strive to minimize the measurement
variability, we do not attempt to isolate the biological factors.
For each patient breast, we process the results of the monthly
scans to quantify the variability in both the raw measured signals
and in generated images. We analyze variability by calculating
the Pearson correlation between time-domain signals, the structural similarity index between breast images, and the maximum
pixel intensity in the images.
In the following sections, we introduce the measurement system, describe the clinical trials and participants, and then provide an analysis of the resulting scan data. We compare the
collected signals and reconstructed images for successive scans
of the same breast over time. The main conclusion of the study
is a summary of the anticipated variability in time-domain microwave measurements, conducted over a period of multiple
months, of the same breast. As a secondary outcome, the study
allowed us to fine-tune the system and identify procedures and
parameters to optimize the design of the next-generation prototype.

531

Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the radome (left), with cross-polarized and
copolarized antenna positions labeled numerically. A1, A5, A9 and A13 are
closest to the height of the chest wall; and photograph of the radome and
antenna array (right) in a wooden holder.

II. SYSTEM AND TRIAL DESCRIPTION
In this section, we describe the monitoring prototype, the
patient volunteers, and the measurement protocol for collecting
the breast scans.
A. Time-Domain Microwave Radar System
The system, initially presented in [11], operates as in typical multistatic radar. A short-duration (70 ps length full-width
at half-maximum) pulse is generated in the time-domain. The
pulse is reshaped using a passive microstrip line [16] in order
to focus its frequency spectrum over the 2–4 GHz range. This
selected spectral range constitutes a compromise between losses
of in-tissue propagation (prohibitively large at higher frequencies) and the insufficient spatial resolution at low frequencies.
After reshaping, the pulse is amplified before being fed into a
transmitting antenna. The wave propagates through the breast
tissue and is received by another antenna and recorded by an
equivalent-time sampling oscilloscope. An automated 16 × 2
electromechanical switching matrix selects each antenna in turn
to transmit, while the remaining antennas act as receivers.
In our system, the sensors are resistively loaded travelingwave antennas, designed specifically for biosensing applications
[17]. The antennas are embedded in a hemispherical dielectric
radome, which fixes their location securely in place. The breast
is positioned in the bowl of the radome. The array is composed of 16 antennas, arranged with four in each quadrant of
the radome, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Antennas are positioned in
cross-polarized and copolarized orientations in order to maximize reception of the scattered wave.
B. Patient Volunteers
We recruited 13 volunteers to participate in the trial; the study
was approved by the Research Ethics and Compliance Office at
McGill University. The inclusion criteria for involvement in the
study were as follows: legal age, no personal history of breast
cancer or breast surgeries, no breast implants, no pacemaker,
no nonremovable piercings in the area. All of the volunteers
were healthy for the duration of the clinical trial. Our present
trials include only healthy patients so that we can evaluate our
system’s response to healthy tissues. Only after this response has

532

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

TABLE I
PATIENT INFORMATION: AGE, BRA CUP SIZE, NUMBER OF VISITS, AND
DURATION OF PARTICIPATION IN THE CLINICAL TRIAL
Patient #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Age

Cup Size

# Visits

# Months

21
25
24
44
54
55
23
44
38
26
22
27
76

C
D
C
C
B
B
B
C
B
A
B
C
B

4
4
5
6
4
2
6
6
4
5
4
3
4

6
6
7
8
8
2
6
5
5
6
6
3
4

Fig. 2. Patient interface table with measurement system underneath (left) and
a patient getting her breast scanned with the system (right) [12].

been well examined can we properly investigate the system’s
response to developed malignant lesions; this will constitute a
study organized and approved for a separate group and type of
volunteers. The 13 patient volunteers were aged 21 to 76, with
bra cup sizes from A to D. Patient visits were scheduled to occur
on a monthly basis to coordinate with the menstrual cycle. Due
to limitations in their availability, not every person was scanned
every month. A summary of the patient and visit information is
provided in Table I.
C. Measurement Procedure
All breast scans were recorded with the same measurement
parameters: each signal contained 1024 samples and was sampled at 40 GSa/s (sampling period Ts = 25 ps), with a pulse
repetition rate of 1 MHz. Each breast scan is composed of 240
signals, collected from the 16 × 16 multistatic antenna array.
Photographs of our system prototype and of a volunteer getting
her breast scanned are shown in Fig. 2.
We also note that all right breast scans were recorded with
16 averages per signal and all left breast scans were recorded
with 32 averages. Using 32 averages lowers the measurement
noise in the recorded signal as compared to using 16 averages;
however, the measurement time is longer. Thus, although not
a component of the current study, this data collection scheme
enabled examination of the tradeoff between the time and noise
parameters. In our previous work [18], successful imaging was
achieved regardless of the number of averages.
For all scans, ultrasound gel was used as the immersion
medium. Its purpose is to fill any air gaps between the irreg-

ularly shaped breast and the radome. The measured dielectric
properties of the gel at the centre frequency 3 GHz are: relative
permittivity εr = 68, conductivity σ = 3 S/m, and loss tangent
tanδ = 0.26. Due to its loss factor, the gel attenuates multiple reflections between the two interfaces. The same volume
of ultrasound gel was used for all scans (left breast and right
breast) conducted during each patient visit. We measured the
gel volume during the first visit, and used approximately the
same amount for subsequent visits, but there were small variations in volume and distribution. The amount of gel required is
determined by the breast size, thus the volume of gel used was
patient-specific.
At each visit, each breast was scanned three times: twice successively with no change in parameters, and a third time after
the patient moved and repositioned their breast in the radome.
There were a total of 57 patient visits, resulting in 82 080 individual signals. The two consecutive scans of each set of scans
are denoted as baseline (BL1, BL2) scans. These scans differ
only in terms of measurement noise. The third scan, taken after
repositioning (AR), has the added variation due to the breast
position relative to the ultrasound gel and radome. For the patient repositioning, the patient was asked to remove their breast
and then reposition it into the radome, mimicking the effect of
positioning the breast on a new scan date. The results on system
robustness to movement and other measurement uncertainties,
e.g., horizontal and vertical noise, were presented in [19]. Thus,
for each patient visit, unless otherwise noted, we only consider
the baseline (BL1) scans from here on.
Due to a failure of measurement equipment, specifically, the
oscilloscope, partway through the clinical trial study, we had to
change the setup configuration such that the data was recorded
on a different scope channel. In experiments with more advanced
systems, a similar malfunction might occur or it may prove necessary to use multiple measurement systems, so it is useful to
understand the anticipated impact on measurement variability.
In particular, we began the trials using Channel 1 (Ch1) to record
the data. Out of the 57 patient visits, 38 were recorded using
Ch1. Late in the trials we had to switch to recording the data
on Channel 2 (Ch2). Data for the remaining 19 patient visits
was recorded on Ch2. All recording parameters were maintained consistent regardless of which channel was used. After
analyzing the data, we found that in images generating using
differential baseline signals, the mean maximum pixel intensity
of all images was −32.6 dB for Ch1, and −31.5 dB for Ch2.
Although the Ch2 dataset is smaller, this does appear as a source
of noise in the data. However, as will be shown, imaging results
with scans of the same patient on different days (SZ) compared
to scans of the same volunteer taken on the same day (BL)
vary by more than −32 dB. Thus, changes due to the channel
of recording are not thought to be a contributing factor to the
similarity (or dissimilarity) between scans of a given patient.
D. Notation
For clarity in the recorded data, we introduce the notation for
the various trial parameters. Volunteers are denoted VY, with
Y = 1 : 13. Within the scans from each patient volunteer, the
subsequent scans are denoted SZ, Z = 1 : i, where i is equal to

PORTER et al.: EARLY CLINICAL STUDY OF TIME-DOMAIN MICROWAVE RADAR FOR BREAST HEALTH MONITORING

Fig. 3. Sample plots of aligned collected signals for each of the six visits
(S1:S6) of V7, left breast: A1 A4 (top) and A1 3 A1 5 (bottom). The corresponding signal from the same antenna pairs from a scan of the radome filled with
ultrasound gel (US) is also shown for comparison (bold, black line). The difference signals between scans of the volunteer (S2-S1) and between a volunteer
scan and the ultrasound-filled radome (S2-US) are also shown (bold, orange
line).

the number of visits for that volunteer (e.g., if the patient visited
on six occasions, as did V4 in Table I, then i = 6).
Further, we name the antennas in the radome as shown in
Fig. 2. In order to properly interpret the recorded signals, we
must know where the antennas are located relative to each other.
A transmit-receive antenna pair is denoted as AT AR , where T
= antenna transmitter number and R = receiver number. For
example, A3 A4 is the transmit-receive antenna pair for when and
antenna number 3 is the transmitter and number 4 the receiver.

533

shown here have undergone alignment. The time axis shows
the signal from when the oscilloscope starts to record. The
length of the signal shown is sufficient to cover both the earlyand late-time responses. The pulses shown have contributions
from various signal components, including scattering from the
radome, ultrasound, skin, breast interior, and waves traveling
directly between antenna pairs. The early time portion of the
pulses are most significantly due to the direct path traveled from
antenna to antenna when the antennas are next to each other
and a surface wave traveling along the radome or ultrasound gel
between antennas; further, if there is a breast present, there is a
contribution from the ultrasound-skin reflection. The later time
signals (when the pulse envelope is decreasing) are due to the
transmission/reflection of the breast tissues, and possible noise
sources.
As expected, the antenna pair with transmitter and receiver
further apart (A1 A4 ) results in collected signals with lower amplitude and time delay relative to antenna pairs that are closer
to each other (A13 A15 ). We also note that wave polarization affects the shape and amplitude of the transmitted signals: As the
radome is hemispherical, and antennas point toward the center
of the sphere, the angle between A1 and A4 is greater than that
between A13 and A15 . In other words, the angular orientation
of antennas relative to one another varies for different pairs.
From the plots in Fig. 3, we see that the signal trends are
similar for each visit. Some variation in the collected signals
on different visit occasions is expected due to different volume and distribution of ultrasound gel, slight changes in patient
positioning within the radome, and possible changes in tissue
properties.
In Fig. 3, the signals recorded with the radome filled with ultrasound gel (without a breast present) have similar early-time
response to the volunteer scans, while the later-time response
does vary. In order to explore the removal of the direct pulse,
surface wave, and skin reflection, Fig. 3 also plots two difference signals. The difference between the signal from the given
antenna pair for two volunteer scans (S2 and S1) is shown,
along with the difference between S2 and the ultrasound gel
scan (US). In both cases, the early-time signal is significantly
reduced. The two difference signals are also closely matched
in amplitude. Similar results are found for the other antenna
pairs. The monitoring application by its design involves system calibration using patient scans. However, at the onset of
the screening history, in the absence of earlier scans, calibration
with ultrasound gel scans can remove the majority of unwanted
signal content.

III. SIGNAL ANALYSIS
We first examine the recorded signals from each scan, and
then analyze the images reconstructed from this data. Throughout this study, particular attention is paid to V4, V7, and V8.
These volunteers were scanned monthly, having six scans each
and resulting in more signal data than for other volunteers.
We begin by visual inspection of the collected signals. In
Fig. 3, we plot sample received signals for two select antenna
pairs for volunteer V7, visits S1 to S6, and for a scan of the
radome filled with ultrasound gel for reference. The signals

A. Comparison of Signals From Different Scans
We now quantify the similarity between signals collected
from scans on the same breast over multiple patient visits.
First, we calculate the cross correlation between signals. For
each scan, there are 240 signals recorded, one for each transmitreceive antenna pair. When comparing two scans, we compare
on a corresponding signal-to-signal basis, i.e., compare A1 A2
from scan 1 (S1) with A1 A2 from scan 2 (S2), then A1 A3 from
S1 with A1 A3 from S2, etc. The cross correlation is normalized

534

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 4. Boxplots for each SZ of each volunteer (VY) showing the median
(centre horizontal line of each box), and ± 2.7 standard deviations (whiskers) of
the maximum cross correlation of SZ with S1 for the 50 antenna pairs in S1 with
the largest peak amplitude. Vertical green lines demarcate the volunteers. Also
shown, in blue, is a boxplot of maximum cross correlation values comparing
signals intervolunteers. Note that red crosses indicate outliers.

to the value of the autocorrelations at zero lag. We obtain the
cross correlation (at best time alignment) for the signals from
each antenna pair
(AT AR )S Z , (AT AR )St 1


cST ZR = max 
SZ  
S1
t
(AT AR )  (AT AR ) 

(1)

for T = 1 : 16, R = 1 : 16, T = R
where cST ZR is the computed cross correlation value between
(AT AR )S Z , the signal from antenna pairs AT AR in scan SZ,
and (AT AR )S 1 , the signal from antenna pairs AT AR in scan S1,
· denotes the inner product, and |·| is the 2 -norm. The value
cST ZR is obtained is at the single time shift, t, that maximizes the
inner product. This procedure results in 240 cross correlation
values for each scan SZ with the first scan S1 as the reference
(one value per antenna pair). We focus our analysis on the
50 antenna pairs that have the largest peak amplitude; more
specifically, those pairs AT AR that have the largest signal value
over all points in time.
We do not examine mean or minimum cross correlation values
because signals that are close to the noise floor of the system
or the background clutter level may vary significantly between
scans. These are low amplitude signals that do not contribute to
image generation and analysis sufficiently to impact the results.
The aforementioned procedure is done to calculate the cross
correlation between S1 and SZ (Z = 2 : i, where i is the number
of monthly scans for a given patient) from multiple patient
visits for each volunteer. The resulting ranges of maximum
cross correlation values are plotted in Fig. 4.
From Fig. 4, the highest maximum cross correlation value
between scans of the same patient is 0.9947, and the lowest is
0.9241. It is also noticeable that some scans are more similar
to S1 than others, and that this effect is not dependent on the
time elapsed between scans. Some volunteers have significantly
higher maximum cross correlation values than others. For instance, for V2 all values are below 0.96 while for V9 all are

above 0.98. The first five volunteers (V1 to V5) all had their initial breast scan during the first week of clinical trials, when the
placing of the breast in the immersion medium was still being
optimized. This could have led to differences between the first
scan S1 and later scans SZ for V1 to V5.
Also plotted in Fig. 4, is the set of maximum cross correlation
values obtained when comparing scans intervolunteer (shown in
blue). This indicates that most signals (i.e., from specific antenna
pairs) are similar across all scans of a given volunteer.
In terms of breast health, the maximum cross correlation of
recorded signals may not be a particularly useful metric, because
the presence of a tumor is not anticipated to significantly alter
the signal shape or amplitude. However, we should have in
mind that the cross correlation provides an indication of the
repeatability of the measurement procedure.
We also calculate the cross correlation values for two further
scenarios: 1) the difference signal of (SZ – S1) with SZ, and 2)
the difference signal of (SZ – US) with SZ, for all scans of all
volunteers. The difference (SZ – S1), for SZ and S1 from the
same volunteer, results in a residual signal that has effectively
eliminated the components of the signals that appear in both SZ
and S1 scans, namely, the direct pulse, the surface wave, and,
the skin reflection. On the other hand, the difference of SZ and
US results in a residual signal that has removed the direct pulse
and the surface wave. We note that the difference signals are
only meaningful if the two scans are first time-aligned, as they
are here.
For the top 50 antenna pairs, as is presented in Fig. 3, the
median values for the cross correlation of (SZ – S1) with SZ,
for each visit, range from [−0.29, 0.45], with a median over
all scans of all volunteers of 0.05. As the signals from the S1
and SZ are known to be similar (see Fig. 3), these low cross
correlation values suggest that calibration with S1 effectively
eliminates undesirable components of the SZ signal (skin reflection, direct pulse, surface wave) that are also present in the
S1 scan. Similarly, the median values for the cross correlation
of (SZ – US) with SZ fall within [−0.19, 0.52], with a median of
0.23. This demonstrates that dominant components of the signal
(the direct pulse and surface wave) have been removed with US
calibration; however, the removal is not as successful as with the
S1 calibration (due to the lack of removing the skin reflection).

B. Relative Permittivity Estimates
We use the radome filled with ultrasound gel (with no breast)
as a calibration to calculate the propagation delay for various
antenna pairs with a propagation medium of known material
properties. We can then estimate the average relative permittivity, εr , of a breast when it is placed inside the radome. The
calculation is performed at the center frequency of our application, 3 GHz, and neglects dispersion. More specifically, for
a single transmit-receive antenna pair wherein the antennas are
located on opposite sides of the breast, we can write
du s1
db
dr
+
+
= t1 + τ1
vr
vu s
vb

(2)

PORTER et al.: EARLY CLINICAL STUDY OF TIME-DOMAIN MICROWAVE RADAR FOR BREAST HEALTH MONITORING

TABLE II
AVERAGE BREAST εr FOR EACH OF THE FIRST FOUR MONTHLY VISITS
(S1:S4): LEFT BREAST FOR V7 AND V8
Volunteer #
V7
V8

Scan S1

Scan S2

Scan S3

Scan S4

27.2
25.6

27.0
24.7

27.2
28.6

26.4
26.2

TABLE III
AVERAGE BREAST εr FOR THE 26 BREASTS FROM ALL VOLUNTEERS,
SEPARATED BY AGE GROUP
Age Range
< 30
30–49
50+

Values accurate to within ± 1.4.

Average ε r
31.7
29.3
28.2

Values accurate to within ±
1.4.

where dr , du s1 , and db are the total wave propagation distances
through the radome material, the ultrasound gel and the breast,
respectively, for the given transmit-receive antenna pair positions. Similarly, vr , vu s , and vb are the average propagation
speeds in the three media. The time of propagation of the wave
is t1 , and the jitter in the recorded signal is τ1 . This equation can
be compared to the one written for the calibration case, when
the radome is filled with ultrasound gel only
du s2
dr
+
= t2 + τ2
vr
vu s

535

TABLE IV
AVERAGE BREAST εr FOR ALL VOLUNTEERS, BY CUP SIZE
Cup Size
A–B
C–D

Average ε r
28.7
32.2

Values accurate to within
± 1.4.

(3)

where du s2 is the distance traveled through ultrasound gel and
t2 is the signal arrival time in this scenario. τ2 is the jitter in the
recorded data. In these equations, dr is a fixed constant, as is
vr (the radome size and dielectric properties are well known).
Similarly, du s2 and vu s are precisely known. The breast size,
db can be physically estimated, and du s1 solved for since the
radome size is known. Subtracting (2) from (3) and neglecting
jitter, we can solve for vb in terms of db and a difference in
time. From this velocity, the average relative permittivity can be
calculated. The average relative permittivity can be calculated
for several transmit-receive antenna pairs of any given breast
scan, and then averaged to reduce the contribution of the random
jitter. Here, four antenna pairs are used to obtain a final value.
The estimate εr is dependent on accurate information of the
signal arrival time. As the system operates in the time-domain,
there is an inherent level of jitter in the collected signals that
cannot be completely compensated for. The estimate is further
affected by the imprecise knowledge of the breast volume and
shape, and, consequently, by the thickness and the distribution
of the surrounding ultrasound gel layer. Therefore, the exact
propagation time within these two media is not precisely known.
In the worst-case scenario, i.e., with no jitter compensation and
the maximum uncertainty in ultrasound gel thickness (1 cm), we
calculate that the error in estimated εr is approximately ±1.4.
In Table II, we provide an example for V7 and V8 that shows
how the estimated average relative permittivity changes over
four consecutive scans of the same breast. These values are
calculated from the average value over the three scans of a given
breast from each patient visit (BL1, BL2, and AR). Table II
shows that the εr values experience minor monthly variations;
in fact, this level of change is insignificant relative to the error
in the calculation.
Next, we compute the average εr for all breasts within given
patient age categories. The results are presented in Table III.
Despite the small sample size, we do see that the average εr decreases with increasing age as is expected (the younger women

are more likely to have denser breast tissues) [20]. Finally, the
average relative permittivity is presented based on breast size in
Table IV. This table suggests that, for our limited patient population, the women with smaller breast sizes have, on average,
slightly less dense breasts than those with larger size. These
preliminary observations will be tested on a larger sample size
in future studies.
IV. IMAGE GENERATION AND ANALYSIS
A. Image Reconstruction
The signals are preprocessed before their use in an imaging
algorithm. First, the signals are cropped to begin just before the
start of the main pulse; only the region of interest is retained. The
signals are then filtered with a low-pass filter at 4 GHz. Finally,
the signals are time-aligned to remove jitter. This is achieved
by aligning signals based on a simultaneously recorded clock
signal, and by using cross correlation techniques. A detailed
description of the time-alignment method can be found in our
previous work [18].
Images are generated using a differential radar method as
follows. In order to generate images using this method, we
need to have two scans obtained with our system: one as a
“calibration” dataset, and one as the signal set. All signals from
the calibration and signal sets are time-aligned with respect to
each other, as in
X̃jS Z (t) = XjS Z (t + τ )

(4)

where τ is the time shift (with units of samples) that provides
the maximum cross correlation of XjS Z and XjS 1 : XjS 1 is the set
of signals from scan S1, XjS Z is the set of signals from scan SZ,
X̃jS Z is the time-aligned XjS Z , j = 1 : 240 is the signal index
which is the same for all scans, and Z = 2 : i. This compensates
for any time offsets that occur between scan times. The timealigned signals are then subtracted, resulting in a differential
signal that has been removed of any systematic sources of noise

536

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

or clutter. For a given scan SZ, the differential signal set δ S Z is
calculated as follows, using S1 as the calibration scan
δjS Z = X̃jS Z − XjS 1 .

(5)

This resulting differential signal is then input into the imaging
algorithm.
In this study, we use the delay-multiply-and-sum (DMAS)
algorithm [21] to reconstruct images of the breast. The voxel
resolution is set to 2 mm3 , and the imaging area is the same size
as the radome. We generate images using the first patient visit for
each patient (S1) as the calibration scan for later patient visits
of that same patient (SZ, Z = 2 : i). The imaging parameters
used to calculate time delays in the algorithm are based on the
relative permittivity estimates for each individual patient, and
include the layer of ultrasound gel. Full 3-D visualizations are
produced from a sequence of 2-D cross-sectional images.
B. Imaging Results
We next present sample images, generated using the differential signals input into the DMAS algorithm. All images are
shown as 2-D coronal slices, with red regions representing areas of high scattering and blue regions indicating weak or no
scattering. More specifically, as we obtained the images using
a differential signal, they demonstrate the differences between
the two breast scans from which they are generated. In this way,
scattering regions in the images do not necessarily indicate scatterers within the breast, but they do indicate differences in the
tissue in that region between the occasions of the two breast
scans. For example, if there were no measurement uncertainties or noise and no breast tissue changes in between scans, the
differential signal would identically equal zero, and the reconstructed image, when using the same scale, would be entirely
dark blue.
In Fig. 5, we plot a sample slice of the differential images
generated for the left breast of volunteer 9 (V9), in both linear
and log scale. The slice is taken at a depth of 21 mm from the
chest wall toward the nipple. The imaging region is delimited by
the radome walls; the radome boundary may coincide with the
location of the skin, depending on breast size. V9 participated in
the clinical trial for a total of four scans on different occasions.
Thus, the three differential images were generated using scan
1 as calibration, and scans 2, 3, and 4 as the datasets. These
three images are normalized to the peak pixel intensity of an
image formed by processing scan 1, calibrated with a scan of the
radome completely filled with the immersion medium. Although
it may include greater clutter due to the effects of reflections
from the skin-gel interface, such an image provides an indication
of the maximum scattering induced by the presence of a breast,
and thus its maximum pixel intensity serves as a reasonable
normalization value. Since all images in Fig. 5 are normalized
to a common value, the effect is merely a change in the scale.
The image contents include changes due to tissues, along with
system-related noise sources (for instance, breast position and
random measurement noise).
As is seen from Fig. 5, the differential images shown in linear
scale suggest that the scans S2, S3, and S4, are all similar to

Fig. 5. Reconstructed images for V9, left breast, for scan 2 (top), scan 3
(middle) and scan 4 (bottom): in linear scale (left column) and log scale (dB,
right column). The images are generated using scan 1 as calibration.

S1. We also note that there are small visible changes in the
images, for instance, in the image for S2 there are two brighter
regions just above and to the right of the center of the image.
However, in the slices of S3 and S4, these brighter areas are no
longer noticeable. In the context of monitoring a patient, healthy
tissue changes may appear in the images over time; these should,
however, vanish in the long term, unlike the possibly developing
malignant growth.
The image slices plotted in log scale, in Fig. 5, allow us to
better quantify the results. For S2, the maximum pixel intensity
found in the differential image is at −12 dB relative to the maximum pixel intensity for S1 calibrated with a breastless system.
Similarly, the maximum pixel intensity for S3 is −14 dB and
for S4 is −16 dB. We note that the results do not necessarily degrade as the scan occasions become further apart in time. More
importantly, it is evident that this maximum pixel intensity value
itself is not useful for identifying the presence of malignancies
without further information. A near-future study is planned to
characterize the relationship between pixel intensity in a differential image and tissue changes in the breast, i.e., what pixel
intensity values can result from healthy tissue changes, and what
values are more likely to indicate a malignant growth.
C. Maximum Pixel Intensity
Continuing the analysis of the maximum pixel intensities of
the differential images, we next provide a comparison of the
maximum intensities for each volunteer over each scan. At this

PORTER et al.: EARLY CLINICAL STUDY OF TIME-DOMAIN MICROWAVE RADAR FOR BREAST HEALTH MONITORING

Fig. 6. Maximum pixel intensity values for two scans taken on the same
day without patient movement (baseline; BL; blue circles), two scans taken on
the same day before and after patient repositioning (after repositioning; AR;
magenta circles) and two scan taken on different days (SZ calibrated with S1;
denoted as “SZ comp S1;” orange squares), for all scans of all volunteers. The
vertical black lines separate the data by volunteer: the first four blue points (and
three orange points) are for V1, and so on up to V13.

stage, we take advantage of the multiple breast scans that were
collected during each patient visit. As stated in Section II-C,
during each visit, three breast scans were taken of each breast.
The first two were taken consecutively, and the third after the
patient repositioned her breast in the radome. Generating images
that use the first two of these breast scans, one as the dataset and
the other as the calibration set allows us to identify the maximum
pixel value that is present in the images when the two scans are as
similar as possible (no patient movement, no changes in tissue,
no changes in immersion medium volume or distribution, and no
changes in measurement procedure). Thus, this represents the
“Baseline” (BL) scenario, in which the only information present
in the images is noise, and it provides us with the minimum level
of change that can occur between two scans recorded with our
system. Similarly, the after-repositioning scenario (AR) allows
identification of the differences in the images due to the breast
position. AR images are generated using the after-repositioning
scan data calibrated with the first scan taken on that day (prior
to repositioning).
In Fig. 6, we present the maximum pixel intensity values
for image slices of the left breast for all volunteers. There are
three parts to the data for each VY: 1) The baseline scenario
(as described above) wherein the maximum pixel intensity is
representative of the case in which there are no breast tissue
changes between scans and no change in breast position; 2)
The after repositioning scenario in which the scan after breast
repositioning is calibrated with the scan prerepositioning, but
taken on the same day; and 3) SZ calibrated with S1, which
indicates the level of change seen between successive monthly
scans. Note that as each SZ is calibrated with S1, there is one
less data point than there are patient scans for each patient.
The data presented in Fig. 6 help illustrate how well the
system could serve the purpose of breast health monitoring
application. For example, for V7-V9, the results indicate that

537

the maximum pixel intensity of scans over time (S2–SZ) are
consistent within each volunteer, especially compared to the
variability observed across all volunteers. Further, for patients
with similar maximum pixel value ranges, variations in healthy
breast scans do not readily alter the imaging results (as in Fig. 5
for V9). These results imply that monitoring techniques that
differentiate between healthy and tumorous breasts may be implemented through computer-aided detection, or classification,
of maximum pixel intensities.
For select other patient volunteers, we do observe a discrepancy in the maximum pixel intensities. Specifically, the maximum of V4 and V5 is three to five times greater than that of
any other volunteer. This may be due to several factors, in addition to the relative positioning of the breast to the immersion
medium. We postulate that the increased consistency in later
volunteer scans (V7 and thereafter) originates from improved
measurement routine and equipment usage. Further study also
remains to be done to determine what pixel intensity variation
constitutes appropriate levels of healthy tissue changes (the results shown here may well be within this range) and what levels
indicate possible tumor presence.
D. Structural Similarity Index
Finally, we apply an image similarity metric, the structural
similarity index (SSIM) [22], to compare images generated from
successive scans of the same volunteer. This metric functions
by studying the relationships between spatially-near pixels, as
opposed to mean-square error or cross correlation similarity
functions that compare image intensities on a pixel-to-pixel basis. All image comparisons are conducted based on only two
images at a time (or in our case, two 2-D slices of the 3-D image). The SSIM uses three specific image qualities in order to
produce a similarity value: the luminance, the contrast, and the
structure. We first remove the mean intensity from each image
to obtain zero-mean data. Then the standard deviation of values
of each image is used to estimate the contrast; each image is then
normalized for unit standard deviation. Finally, the normalized
images are compared for structural content. The SSIM value is
equal to one if the image under test is exactly identical to the
reference image, and is equal to zero if the images share no
similarities.
We present the SSIM values for the clinical data in Fig. 7.
To obtain these results, differential images are used. In particular, we generate an image using the second scan of each
volunteer (S2) calibrated with the first scan of each volunteer
(S1). This image is denoted as “S2 cal S1” and it is the reference image for the SSIM calculation for each volunteer. The
later scans of each volunteer (SZ, Z > 2) are calibrated with S1
(“SZ cal S1”). These remaining images are used as the comparison data for the SSIM. A single SSIM value is acquired
for each set of two 3-D images that are under comparison. In
particular, we calculated the SSIM for each 2-D slice, and then
averaged over all slices in order to obtain a single output per 3-D
image.
In Fig. 7, the SSIM values are plotted for each image of each
volunteer. We note that there are no SSIM values for V6 as only

538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF METRICS: THE MAXIMUM, MINIMUM, MEAN, MEDIAN AND
STANDARD DEVIATION OVER ALL PATIENT SCANS, OF THE CROSS
CORRELATION (XCORR), MAXIMUM PIXEL INTENSITY (MPI, DB) FOR Sz
SCANS, AND SSIM

Maximum
Mean
Median
Minimum
Standard Deviation

XCORR

MPI (dB)

SSIM

0.9947
0.9372
0.9511
0.7593
0.011

45.7
8.59
4.62
0.13
10.3

0.7867
0.5905
0.6111
0.4099
0.1066

Fig. 7. Mean SSIM values for each image of each volunteer VY: the reference
image is the image S2 calibrated with S1, while the images being compared are
SZ (Z > 2) calibrated with S1 (“SZ cal S1”). There are a different number of
points for each volunteer, as determined by the number of visits in which they
had breast scans.

two scans were recorded for this volunteer, S1 and S2, and thus
there are no remaining scans for comparison purposes.
The SSIM values provide a measure of the change in the volunteer scans over time. From Fig. 7, it is clear that the similarity
varies from scan to scan and patient to patient. As seen in the
plot, the highest SSIM value is 0.79 for V8. The lowest value
is 0.41, for V10. It is also seen that for some volunteers, for
instance, V4 and V11, the SSIM values obtained from different images are closely grouped. Use of the SSIM metric may
provide information about how much the breast changes over
time, which is an important part of a breast health monitoring
application.
V. DISCUSSION
In this section, we briefly compare the signal and imaging
data. We then provide a summary of patient feedback, and finally
discuss the potential improvements to our system, based on the
results shown in this study.
A. Comparison of Results
A summary of applying the three-presented metrics to the
collected data is provided in Table V. The data are taken from
within scans of a given patient, over all patients. In other words,
the results summarize what values can be expected for a new
scan, based on a previous scan of that same patient. This is in
contrast to the “interpatient” data, which are shown on the right
of Fig. 4, that demonstrates the range of values expected if you
were to compare breast scans from one patient to scans from
another, different patient. In Table V, the cross correlation and
SSIM are as defined in relation to Figs. 4 and 7, respectively.
The maximum pixel intensity is presented in decibels, and here
indicates the difference in maximum pixel intensities between
scans of the same patient.

Fig. 8. Histogram of results from patient feedback question: Question #1 (Q1,
left plot): “On a scale of 1 to 5 (5 being the best), how comfortable was your
scan?” and Question #2 (Q2, right plot) “On a scale of 1 to 5 (5 being the best),
how would you rate the speed of the scan?”

Thorough studies must be performed to identify what types
of changes in signals and images could indicate tumor growth
versus healthy, regular breast changes. In particular, a similar
clinical study must be performed on patients with breast cancer
to confirm that the imaging system can successfully detect a
tumor. It is also relevant to note that healthy changes in breast
tissue may still signify an increase in risk for developing cancer;
it was demonstrated that breast tissues that increase in density
over modest time periods (three years) have an increased breast
cancer risk whereas women with a decrease in tissue density
were at decreased risk [23].
B. Patient Feedback
We asked patients to fill out an exit questionnaire after participating in their first breast scan. Of the 13 women, 12 completed
the questionnaire. Patients were asked about the level of comfort
and speed of the scan, on a scale from 1 to 5 (5 being the best);
results are presented in Fig. 8. A final binary question asking
“Were you comfortable resting in the scan position (yes/no)?”
resulted in 83% “yes.” All patient volunteers were happy to return for future scans. This encouraging outcome confirms that
our microwave imaging system is progressing in the right direction, in terms of fast and comfortable scans.
C. Directions for Future Improvements
From the clinical data and analysis, we have been able to
identify multiple areas in which the system components and
measurement parameters can be improved.

PORTER et al.: EARLY CLINICAL STUDY OF TIME-DOMAIN MICROWAVE RADAR FOR BREAST HEALTH MONITORING

First, we summarize physical system modifications that could
lead to more consistent data collection. The results presented
here, together with our work in [19], suggest that patient positioning within the radome can affect the collected data if it is not
well controlled. With our current system design, it is a challenge
to accurately reposition the patient. The system would be more
robust if: 1) a smaller radome is used, allowing less room for
breast movement; and 2) the need for an immersion medium
can be eliminated, or at least a semisolid material can be used in
place of the gel-like ultrasound (so that there is no uncertainty
in the immersion volume or distribution around the breast).
Second, we can improve the data collection process. In particular, using a higher sampling rate can result in more accurate relative permittivity estimates. By using samples that are
spaced more closely in time we can reduce the uncertainty in
the location of major peaks of the signal; this will improve
time-alignment of the data and time-delay calculations.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we have presented results of a time-domain microwave radar system applied to clinical trials of breast health
monitoring. We have scanned 13 healthy patient volunteers a
total of 342 times, with each patient having scans done over a
period ranging from two to eight months. The data for successive
scans of each patient have been analyzed in terms of similarity
of the collected signals, and in terms of the reconstructed breast
images. An important outcome of the study is the identification of the variability that should be expected when calculating
metrics from scans recorded on different days from the same
healthy patient. By specifying this variability, we have provided
a baseline for future studies that involve scans of breasts that
are known to contain tumors.
The results show promise for monitoring, with repeatable
breast scans for several patients. The lack of consistency for
other patients has motivated us to identify multiple factors that
can be addressed to improve the system performance, allowing us to progress toward the construction a successful breast
health-monitoring device. Near-future work will include testing our system’s response and sensitivity to breast scanning of
volunteers with malignant growths.

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the volunteers of the clinical
trial for their participation. They would also like to thank the
McGill University Photonics Systems Group for their experimental resources and colleagues E. Kirshin and A. Santorelli,
Ph.D. students at McGill University, for their help with the
imaging code and building the examination table.

[23]

539

tained from cancer surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, no. 20, pp. 6093–
6115, 2007.
T. Grzegorczyk et al., “Fast 3-D tomographic microwave imaging for
breast cancer detection,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 8, pp.
1584–1592, Aug. 2012.
J. Bourqui et al., “A prototype system for measuring microwave frequency
reflections from the breast,” Int. J. Biomed. Imag., vol. 2012, pp. 1–12,
2012.
H. Jiang et al., “Ultrasound-guided microwave imaging of breast cancer:
Tissue phantom and pilot clinical experiments,” Med. Phys., vol. 32, no.
8, pp. 2528–2535, Aug. 2005.
M. Klemm et al., “Clinical trials of a UWB imaging radar for breast
cancer,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., Apr. 2010, pp. 1–4.
E. C. Fear et al., “Microwave breast imaging with a monostatic radarbased system: A study of application to patients,” IEEE Trans. Microw.
Theory Techn., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2119–2128, May 2013.
T. M. Grzegorczyk et al., “Microwave tomographic imaging for breast
cancer chemotherapy monitoring,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag.,
Apr. 2014, pp. 702–703.
X. Zeng et al., “Experimental investigation of the accuracy of an ultrawideband time-domain microwave-tomographic system,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3939–3949, Dec. 2011.
E. Porter et al., “Time-domain multistatic radar system for microwave
breast screening,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 229–232, Feb. 2013.
E. Porter et al., “Breast monitoring via time-domain microwave radar:
Early clinical trial study,” in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Aug. 2014, pp. 6601–6604.
E. Porter et al., “Breast tissue screening with microwave time-domain
radar: Initial clinical trials,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Antenna Meas. Appl.,
Nov. 2014, pp. 1–4.
E. Porter et al., “Microwave time-domain radar: Healthy tissue variations
over the menstrual cycle,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 1310–1313, Feb. 2015.
A. Santorelli et al., “Image classification for a time-domain microwave
radar system: Experiments with stable modular breast phantoms,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., Apr. 2015, pp. 1–5.
A. Santorelli et al., “Experimental demonstration of pulse shaping for
time-domain microwave breast imaging,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol.
133, pp. 309–329, 2013.
H. Kanj and M. Popović, “A novel ultra-compact broadband antenna for
microwave breast tumor detection,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 86, pp.
169–198, 2008.
E. Porter et al., “Time-domain microwave radar applied to breast imaging:
Measurement reliability in a clinical setting,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol.
149, pp. 119–132, 2014.
P. C. Stomper et al., “Analysis of parenchymal density on mammograms
in 1353 women 25–79 years old,” Am. J. Roentgenol., vol. 167, no. 5, pp.
1261–1265, Nov. 1996.
E. Porter et al., “Measurement uncertainties in differential radar applied
to breast imaging,” in Proc. IEEE Sensors Appl. Symp., 2014, pp. 6–10.
H. B. Lim et al., “Confocal microwave imaging for breast cancer detection:
Delay-multiply-and-sum image reconstruction algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1697–1704, Jun. 2008.
Z. Wang et al., “Image quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612,
Apr. 2004.
K. Kerlikowske et al., “Longitudinal measurement of clinical mammographic breast density to improve estimation of breast cancer risk,” J. Nat.
Cancer Inst., vol. 99, no. 5, pp. 386–395, Mar. 2007.

REFERENCES
[1] American Cancer Society, “Facts and figures 2014,” 2014.
[2] M. T. Mandelson et al., “Breast density as a predictor of mammographic
detection: Comparison of interval- and screen- detected cancers,” J. Nat.
Cancer Inst., vol. 92, no. 13, pp. 1081–1087, Jul. 2000.
[3] M. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave
dielectric properties of normal, benign and malignant breast tissues ob-

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

