IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

619

Evaluation of Ultrasound-Based Sensor to Monitor
Respiratory and Nonrespiratory Movement
and Timing in Infants
Gregory P. Heldt∗ , Member, IEEE, and Raymond J. Ward III

Abstract—Goal: To describe and validate a noncontacting sensor
that used reflected ultrasound to separately monitor respiratory,
nonrespiratory, and caretaker movements of infants. Methods: An
in-phase and quadrature (I & Q) detection scheme provided adequate bandwidth, in conjunction with postdetection filtering, to
separate the three types of movement. The respiratory output was
validated by comparing it to the electrical activity of the diaphragm
(Edi) obtained from an infant ventilator in 11 infants. The nonrespiratory movement output was compared to movement detected
by miniature accelerometers attached to the wrists, ankles, and
heads of seven additional infants. Caretaker movement was compared to visual observations annotated in the recordings. Results:
The respiratory rate determined by the sensor was equivalent to
that from the Edi signal. The sensor could detect the onset of inspiration significantly earlier than the Edi signal (23+/−69 ms).
Nonrespiratory movement was identified with an agreement of 0.9
with the accelerometers. It potentially interfered with the respiratory output an average of 4.7+/−4.5% and 14.9+/15% of the
time in infants not requiring or on ventilatory support, respectively. Caretaker movements were identified with 98% sensitivity
and specificity. The sensor outputs were independent of body coverings or position. Conclusion: This single, noncontacting sensor
can independently quantify these three types of movement. Significance: It is feasible to use the sensor as trigger for synchronizing
mechanical ventilators to spontaneous breathing, to quantify overall movement, to determine sleep state, to detect seizures, and to
document the amount and effects of caretaker activity in infants.
Index Terms—Accelerometer, caretaker, electrical activity of the
diaphragm, infant, in-phase and quadrature detection, movement,
noncontacting sensor, respiratory monitor, ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE most common methods for measuring respiratory
activity involve contacting systems, such as impedance
plethysmography or an attachment of a sensor of flow to the
airway. Noncontacting methods are useful when no contact is
desired or possible. These include the use of pressure mattresses
[1], radar [2], infrared imaging of warm expired gas [3], ultrasound methods of detecting airflow at the face [4], or reflected
ultrasound from the underside of a mattress [5]. Noncontacting
sensors are especially useful for sleep apnea detection, and have

T

Manuscript received June 7, 2015; revised July 15, 2015 and July 30, 2015;
accepted July 30, 2015. Date of publication August 11, 2015; date of current version February 16, 2016. This work was supported in part by the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute under Grant 1 R41 HL 102940. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ G. P. Heldt is with the Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Diego, CA 92103 USA (e-mail: gheldt@ucsd.edu).
R. J. Ward III is with the BioData Innovation Systems.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2466633

been used in infants for synchronization of a mechanical ventilator with spontaneous breathing efforts even when a patient
has an artificial airway or must wear nasal prongs with large
leaks in the airway-infant interface [6]. In this latter application,
the most important characteristic is the accurate and rapid detection of the onset of inspiration [7]. This is because infants
with respiratory distress have respiratory rates of 60–120/min
and inspiratory times of approximately 300 ms. The trigger for
synchronizing the ventilator must assist early in inspiration to
produce increased and more consistent tidal volumes [8].
All systems for monitoring respiratory activity, both contacting and noncontacting, are limited by artifacts of nonrespiratory
and caretaker movements. Extensive efforts in the development
of these systems have been made to eliminate these artifacts.
Nonrespiratory and caretaker movements that produce the artifacts, however, provide useful clinical information. Overall
movement is an indicator of well-being, as patients with increased levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha have lethargy and
reduced movement [9], is useful for determining the stage of
sleep [10] and documenting patient comfort and agitation, and
has potential for assessing the neurodevelopment of infants [11],
[12]. Caretaker movement is important in assessing the physiological response to handling of infants, and to document the
amount of care the infant is receiving.
The purpose of this paper is to describe and validate a single,
noncontacting sensor that can reliably detect respiratory, nonrespiratory, and caretaker movements as separate channels of
information. Furthermore, we assessed the ability of the sensor
to detect the onset of inspiration to demonstrate the feasibility
of the use of the sensor respiratory movement output to synchronize a mechanical ventilator with the infant’s spontaneous
breathing effort.
II. METHODS
A. Description of the Sensor, Circuitry, and Algorithm
The basic system is shown in Fig. 1. The sensor head consisted
of a transmitter and a receiver placed 15–50 cm above the infant,
approximately centered over the torso of the infant, mounted
either on the ceiling of the isolette with silicone suction cups,
or on a bracket attached to an open crib or radiant warmer
bed. The sensor could be moved several centimeters toward the
head or the toes without a change in function. The infant was
nursed in the usual coverings or bundled in blankets. The sensor
head was attached to an electronics unit by shielded cables, and
data were acquired with a laptop computer.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

620

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Diagram of the sensor and the infant.

The transmitter emitted a 40 kHz continuous ultrasound (halfangle 20°) that insonated the head and torso of the infant. The
frequency of 40 kHz was chosen because of the excellent propagation of the ultrasound, the efficient reflection off the infant,
and since the transmitter and receiver transducers are readily
available. Even with the coverings, less than 1% of the ultrasound energy was absorbed, and this was approximately three
orders of magnitude less than the safety standards for workers
exposed to ultrasound [13]. This ultrasound was above the range
of human hearing, and did not disturb the infant or the caretaker.
The receiver in the sensor head transduced the ultrasound
that was reflected off the infant. Movement of the infant caused
the reflected signal to have a slight shift in its phase with respect to the transmitted signal, due to the Doppler effect. This
phase shift was detected by the electronics, based on an in-phase
and quadrature demodulation (I & Q) scheme that allowed the
detection of the phase shift over several wavelengths in an unambiguous fashion. This detection scheme was not limited in
bandwidth, so that an algorithm could be developed to process
the signals and to give three separate outputs: 1) the respiratory waveform, 2) nonrespiratory movement of the infant, and
3) movement of caretakers that were in the field of view of the
insonated infant and the receiver.
A functional block diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 2.
All logic functions were implemented using standard TTL components. The transmitter was driven by a variable gain amplifier
whose input was a 40 kHz square wave derived by a 100:1
division of a crystal-controlled oscillator operating at 4 MHz.
The 4 MHz signal was also divided by a biquinary divider to
produce a 160 kHz square wave that was in-phase with the
transmitter signal that was used for the reference signals for the
phase detection. The 160 KHz signal was processed by the dual
D-flip-flop to produce an in-phase clock signal (phase A clock),
and a quadrature phase signal which lagged the in-phase signal
by 90° (phase B clock) at 40 kHz, that were used for the I &
Q detection system of the received reflected signal as shown in
Fig. 3(a).
The receiver was connected to a variable gain amplifier/filter
that amplified the received 40 KHz signal several thousand-fold.
This signal was presented to a comparator that converted the
signal into logic levels “0” or “1.” The output of the comparator

Fig. 2.

Functional block diagram of the sensor hardware system.

Fig. 3. Reference and output signals of the electronics in the I & Q detection
scheme. (a) Phase “A” in-phase and phase “B” quadrature clock signals and the
transmitter drive signal. (b) Output of polarity bits A and B and phase “A” and
“B” signals as an object is moved toward the sensor one wavelength.

was connected simultaneously to the inputs of phase A and
phase B comparators. The clock inputs to phase A and phase B
comparators were the in-phase phase A clock and the quadrature
phase B clock, respectively.
The phase comparator outputs (PCO) of the phase A comparator and phase B comparators were each connected to a low-pass
filter, which were resistor-capacitor networks with a time constant of 0.1 ms that provided a smoothed output of the phase of
the received signal with respect to the transmitted signal. The
PCO were also connected to D-flip-flops that were clocked by
the respective phase clock signals. These flip-flops detected the
polarity of the phase of the received signal zero-crossing from

HELDT AND WARD III: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND-BASED SENSOR TO MONITOR RESPIRATORY AND NONRESPIRATORY MOVEMENT

the comparator outputs, and produced polarity bits A and B.
These polarity bits were used to decode the two phases.
The waveforms of this process are shown in Fig. 3(b) to
demonstrate the sensor outputs as a reflector is moved toward
the sensor. Movement of the reflector through one wavelength
(approximately 0.9 cm) represents 360° of phase shift for the
reflected signal with respect to the transmitted signal. Thus, in
Fig. 3(b), the x-axis represents the signal changes for a 360
phase shift, or the movement of the reflector toward the sensor
through approximately 0.9 cm.
The waveforms of this process are shown in Fig. 3(b) to
demonstrate the sensor outputs as a reflector is moved toward
the sensor. Movement of the reflector through one wavelength
(approximately 0.9 cm) represents 360° of phase shift for the
reflected signal with respect to the transmitted signal. This translated into an output change of 10 V, giving the sensor a potential
sensitivity of several microns of movement.
Thus, in Fig. 3(b), the x-axis represents the signal changes
for a 360° phase shift, or the movement of the reflector toward
the sensor through approximately 0.9 cm.
Polarity bit A changes from 0 to 1 at the beginning of the
movement, with polarity bit A set to logic level 1 until onehalf wavelength of movement. With further movement toward
the sensor, the phase A signal decreases, with the polarity bit
A changing from logic level 1 to 0 to indicate the object is
moving toward the sensor with decreasing phase A output. At
the beginning of the movement, phase B is decreasing, with
the polarity bit B set to 0, until a quarter wavelength of movement (corresponding to 90° phase difference) and then increases,
with polarity bit B changing to 1, indicating movement toward
the sensor. In both the phase A and B signals, the range of
the smoothed phase outputs is that of the power supply (0 to
5 VDC).
The electronic circuit was devised to have two phase outputs
and two polarity bit outputs so that the direction of movement
could be unambiguously tracked across wavelengths by the I &
Q detector. Phase A and phase B comparators were the type I
comparators of the CD 4046 integrated circuit (Fairchild Semiconductors, Inc., San Jose, CA) that had a specification for linearity from 0.5 to 4.5 V. These values were subsequently used in
the decoding algorithm described below. The information from
both phase outputs, corrected by the polarity bits, is identical,
except that when either phase output A or B are near the limit of
their range, above 4.5 V or below 0.5 V, there was little change
in the voltage output for the change in the phase angle, which
led to a low signal to noise ratio. Therefore, to produce the respiratory output from these four signals, only the specified range of
linear operation of the comparators was used so as to eliminate
noise. Since the difference in the phase between the outputs is
fixed at 90°, one or the other is always in their usable range.
The flow chart of the algorithm used to create the respiratory
waveform from these four inputs is shown in Fig. 4. The phase A,
phase B, and polarity bits A and B are inputs to the algorithm. If
phase A is in the usable range (0.5 to 4.5 V), it is used, otherwise
phase B is used. The phase signal chosen is then differenced and
used, or inverted if polarity bit A or polarity bit B is zero. The

621

Fig. 4. Algorithm for determining the respiratory output signal by the use
of the I & Q detection scheme. Respiratory movement was calculated from
the appropriate phase signal that was chosen based on the amplitude in the
linear range, which was differentiated and corrected by the polarity bit, and
then accumulated. Movement was detected as the quotient of the power in the
bandpass filter and the low-pass filter after smoothing.

selected phase, once corrected by the corresponding polarity bit,
is accumulated to produce the respiratory output signal.
Nonrespiratory movement was detected directly from the
phase A output. As can be seen in Fig. 3(b), movement through
a single wavelength of the ultrasound produces a full-scale excursion of the phase signals. These movements produced a highfrequency component to the phase output that was filtered and
used as an indication of movement. In preliminary experiments,
we have found that movement could be defined as a separate
output from the sensor by computing the power in the phase
A signal in the range of 28–33 Hz and normalizing it to the
power of the phase A signal in the range of DC-5 Hz. Prior
to taking the quotient, we smoothed the power function with a
200-point moving average window filter to reduce noise. The
resulting ratio of power is a dimensionless number that is a continuous indication of movement that can resolve movements of
approximately 200 ms duration.
B. Validation Process
1) Signals for Comparison: Signals from the sensor and those
for comparison in the validation were acquired with a commercially available data acquisition system [MP-150 hardware system with HLT-100 isolated input module (BioPac Inc., Goleta,
CA)] that was controlled by a software system that provided
real-time graphical display and stored data in files on a laptop
computer (Acknowledge software, Version 4.3, BioPac Inc., Goleta, CA). All analog signals for comparison to the sensor were
acquired from all channels simultaneously at a rate of 1000
samples/s per channel, graphically displayed in real time, and
stored in files on a laptop computer. During data acquisition,
annotations were added to the recording to document patient

622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 6. Accelerometer system output and the movement output of the sensor
for comparison. The signals were well correlated in time.
Fig. 5. Output of the phase signal of the sensor, Edi for comparison, and the
sensor respiratory and movement output in a 900 g infant. The high-frequency
component in the first part of the recording of the SENSOR phase signal corresponded to nonrespiratory movement of the infant that was not detected by
the Edi signal. During movement, there was some distortion of the respiratory
output of the sensor.

status, changes in the experimental set-up, and episodes of caretaker movement. The acquired data were redisplayed graphically, and the above algorithms were performed within the
Acknowledge software system using standard routines on the
stored data.
a) Respiratory Effort: We compared the sensor respiratory output, to the electrical activity of the diaphragm, or Edi, as
determined by a commercially available mechanical ventilator
(Servo-i, Maquet Corporation, Solna, Sweden) as an independent reference for respiratory effort. A plug-in module in the
ventilator detected the electromyogram of the diaphragm from
a feeding tube (5.5 Fr diameter) that had nine built-in microelectrodes that were flush with the surface and connected to
the ventilator with thin cables in the feeding tube. Proprietary
software in the ventilator combined differential EMG signals
picked up by pairs of the microelectrodes to produce one signal
that represented the Edi [14], [15]. A utility software package
in the Servo-i was used to export data in real time through an
RS-232 port, in conjunction with an external software package
(Servo Tracker, Maquet Corporation, Solna, Sweden) that provided the Edi, airway pressure and flow as voltages for recording
via a digital to analog converter (National Instruments, Model
USB-6212 BNC) at a rate of 100 samples/s. We tested a step
response in airway pressure as detected by an independent pressure transducer, and found a delay time of 10 ms maximum in
this system.
The phase signal of the sensor, Edi, and respiratory and movement output of the sensor are shown in Fig. 5. The high frequency components in the sensor phase signals were associated
with movement, and resulted in the excursions of the movement
signals in the first 6 s of the record. This high frequency component represents the received signal passing through several
wavelengths in a short period of time due to the speed of the
movement of the head and limbs. The sensor movement output
reflected the nonrespiratory movements and was well correlated
in time.
b) Nonrespiratory Movement: We compared the sensor
movement output of the algorithm to nonrespiratory movements
as detected by an independent system of miniature accelerometers. Each accelerometer was a three-axis MEM chip (Model
MMA7340LT, sensitivity 440 mV/g, Freescale Semiconductors,

Tempe, AZ) that was encapsulated in an epoxy housing
6.7 × 3.3 × 10 mm, and weighed less than 200 mg, including
the cable. The accelerometers were fixed to the wrists and ankles
with Velcro straps, and head movement was detected with an accelerometer taped to a cap worn by the infant. The signals from
the three axes of each accelerometer were ac-coupled (timeconstant = 0.05 s) through a buffer amplifier with a 200 Hz
low-pass filter, and the absolute values for each axis were obtained through an active rectifier and summed so as to provide
a single signal that reflected both acceleration of the device and
changes in its orientation to the earth’s gravitation field. The
summed signal from each of the five accelerometers attached
to the four limbs and head were then summed, so that a single
signal represented any nonrespiratory movement in any of the
accelerometers. The accelerometer system was calibrated to a
full-scale of 2.2 V for 1 g, for the sum of the five accelerometers.
The absolute zero-g voltage of the summed signal was tested by
recording the output of the entire accelerometer system during
a free-fall through 0.5 m, during which time the system reached
equilibrium at 0 g. The smallest detectable movement from any
accelerometer was approximately 50 mg, corresponding to a
signal of about 22 mV in the summed signal.
Fig. 6 shows a one-hour recording of the sensor movement
output and the output of the accelerometer system in a 1750 g
infant. There was good visual correlation of the two signals.
c) Movement of the Caretaker: It was appreciated early
in the development of the sensor that movement of hands of
a caretaker between the subject and the sensor produced large
excursions of the nonrespiratory movement output. This was
due to the more rapid movement of the hands than the limbs of
the infant, and a skipping wavelength when a new target of the
reflected signal was received. During the recordings, we made
annotations in the Acknowledge system for periods of time
when the caretaker was handling the infants, for comparison in
subsequent analysis.
2) Patient Studies: The validation was performed in two clinical protocols. Both were approved by the UCSD Institutional
Review Board, and infants were enrolled after written, informed
parental consent was obtained. All infants were in stable clinical
condition, and the clinical team in charge of their care approved
of performing the studies. The description of the infants and the
clinical conditions of the studies is shown in Table I.
a) Protocol 1: This protocol was devised to validate and
characterize the respiratory output of the sensor. For this protocol we studied eleven infants who were requiring noninvasive

HELDT AND WARD III: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND-BASED SENSOR TO MONITOR RESPIRATORY AND NONRESPIRATORY MOVEMENT

TABLE I
INFANT CHARACTERISTICS AND CLINICAL CONDITIONS
Infant#

Ethnic/
sex1

Study Wt.
(g)

Study age
(days)

Record length
(min)

conditions2

Open crib, SU, SB
Isolette, SB
Isolette, SU, PB
Isolette, SU, SC,
SB, PB, PC
Isolette, PC, PB
Isolette, SB
Isolette, PB, SC
Isolette, PB, SB
Isolette, PB, SB
Isolette, PB, SB
Isolette, PB, SB

Infants in Protocol 1
1
2
3
4

H/M
AA/F
AA/F
H/F

2070–2100
940
1395–1740
1380–14 010

53,55
17
32–44
35–37

249
99
558
489

5
6
7
8
9
10
11

C/M
H/M
H/M
C/M
H/M
C/M
A/M

810–900
1010–1050
1160–1230
1430–1500
1145–1185
1120
1270–1275

15–22
39–42
47–51
13–17
28–28
48
38
Total

827
532
336
485
907
281
639
5402

Infants in Protocol 2
12

C/M

1330, 1750

43

155

13

C/F

1140

18

42

14

H/M

3250

13

104

15

C/M

3008

26

66

16

C/M

2260, 2680

58

107

17

H/M

3388

21

41

18

H/F

220

85

105

Total

620

Open crib, SC, SU,
PC, PU
Isolette SC, SU,
PC, PU
Open crib, SC, SU,
PC, PU
Open crib, SC, SU,
PC, PU
Open crib, SC, SU,
PC, PU
Open crib, SC, SU,
PC, PU
Isolette, SC, SU,
PC, PU

1

C = Caucasian, H = Hispanic, AA = African-American, M = Male, F = Female.
SC = Supine, covered, SU = Supine, uncovered, SB = Supine, bundled,
Pc = Prone, covered, PU = Prone, uncovered, PB = Prone, bundled.
3
Infant#17 with narcotic withdrawal.
2

respiratory support with continuous positive airway pressure
or synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation applied by
nasal prongs. These infants were chosen because they were on
respiratory support provided by Servo-i ventilator that also provided the Edi signal for comparison to the respiratory output
of the sensor. Infants were studied in the usual coverings, consisting of blankets and bundling, in both the supine and prone
positions. We performed 29 recordings (1–3 studies in each infant) of 45 to 249 min duration for a total time of 5402 min.
To compare the respiratory rates obtained from the sensor to
that obtained from the Edi, segments of the files that did not
contain caretaker movement were chosen for analysis. We determined the accuracy of detection of the onset of inspiration
by the sensor compared to the Edi by choosing other 10-min
segments wherein there was little or no ventilatory support. To
assess the overall amount of movement that could potentially
interfere with the respiratory signal, the entire length of the
original recordings was used.
b) Protocol 2: The second protocol was devised to validate
the separation of nonrespiratory and caretaker movement from
the respiratory output of the sensor. We studied seven infants
who were active and vigorous, and who were not requiring
ventilatory support. We chose them to represent a large range

623

of weights (1140–3388 g) and normal physical activity while
being nursed in isolettes or open cribs, in both supine and prone
positions, and also when uncovered and covered with their usual
blankets. We performed nine recordings of 41–108 min duration,
for a total time of 620 min that was used for analysis.
3) Signal Processing: We processed the data using the standard functions of the Acknowledge software system after data
acquisition. At each step in the process, we examined the data
graphically to verify proper analysis of the signals.
a) Respiratory Output: A detailed comparison of the respiratory output and the Edi was performed in two parts. The first
was a comparison of the infants’ spontaneous respiratory rates,
and the second was to compare the timing of the onset of inspiration defined by the sensor respiratory output and the Edi. For
the second comparison, we selected one recording from each
infant that contained little or no ventilatory support that could
interfere with the spontaneous breathing.
The respiratory rate was calculated in the same way for the
sensor respiratory output and the Edi. Segments of data, ranging from 26–57 min were selected for the analysis wherein
there was no caretaker movement or artificial breaths given by
the ventilator. The raw sensor signals were first smoothed with a
ten-sample moving window average, since the Edi output used
for comparison was updated at 100 Hz by the Servo-i ventilator
(see above), and then low-pass filtered (Blackman, cutoff frequency 2 Hz, –5.3 dBV at 3 Hz, –68 dBV at 4 Hz). The sensor
signals were then differenced every ten data points. A threshold detector was applied to the differenced signal to produce
a binary representation of inspiration (1) and expiration (0). A
threshold value of approximately 1.5% of the full-scale range
of each signal was used, as it produced an accurate representation of the data on visual inspection of the waveforms and
reduced short transitions due to noise. The respiratory rate was
calculated for sequential 20-s intervals, based on the transition
of inspiration to expiration. A 20-s interval was chosen because
of the large variation in the respiratory rate, and because clinical monitoring systems use a similar interval for updating the
respiratory rate.
To compare the determination of the onset of inspiration, other
segments of 10 min duration were used that were free of caretaker movement, but that included ventilator-induced breaths
with a rate of up to eight per min. These segments were displayed
graphically for the respiratory output, Edi, and airway pressure,
so that breaths produced by the ventilator or a disruption of the
spontaneous breathing due to the ventilator were not included.
A cursor was moved manually through the graphical display
to visually define the inflection points of the sensor respiratory
output and the Edi. The time differences between the points of
inflection of the two signals were then measured. Automation of
the process could not be done within the Acknowledge software.
An example of an analyzed record is shown in Fig. 7, with the
time differences added to the figure. By convention, negative
times represented the sensor respiratory output leading the Edi,
and positive times, lagging.
b) Nonrespiratory Movement: We processed the data from
infants in protocol 2 for nonrespiratory movement. The amplitude of the sensor movement signal, while temporally correlated

624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 7. Comparison of the sensor respiratory output and the Edi. Lead/lag
times between the inflection points in the sensor respiratory output and the Edi
that indicated the start of inspiration were determined and are shown numerically
in ms.

to the accelerometer system as shown in Fig. 6, was not assumed
to be linearly correlated. Signal processing of the sensor movement signal and that of the accelerometer system was performed
to define a single threshold for each system that could be used
as a positive indicator of movement in all recordings. Although
accelerometers have been used in studies of infant movement,
thresholds for “significant” movement in that system have not
been reported. Therefore, a simple receiver-operator curve analysis was not employed, since the definition of true positive
movement for the accelerometers was not available. The optimal threshold in each system was therefore determined so as to
fulfill two requirements: 1) the lowest threshold so as to compare
the smallest movements, and 2) the same proportion of positive
and negative indications of movement in both systems in any
recording.
We first determined the thresholds to fulfill the two requirements in each recording, and then calculated the proportion of
positive movement and the percent agreement between the two
systems in each recording. The averages of the thresholds in all
the recordings were then used to recalculate the proportion of
positive movement and the percent agreement in all the recordings to give an indicator of the overall performance for the
validation.
The optimal thresholds for both systems were obtained by
the following procedure. First, the data in each recording of the
sensor and accelerometer system were scaled to normalize the
data for the full-scale range in the recording. We produced a
histogram of 1000 bins of the normalized data and plotted the
proportion of the data in each bin against the data value of the
bin, as shown in Fig. 8(a).
The scale on the x-axis shown on the figure was expanded
to 0.3 for clarity (lowest 300 bins). The frequency distribution
of the normalized proportion of data points was lower for the
sensor than the accelerometer system, but there were similar
proportions above 2% of the full-scale range. This indicates
the extreme sensitivity of both systems with the sensor having
greater sensitivity than the accelerometer system at the limit of
movement detection.
We then determined the normalized values at which there was
equal proportion of + indications of movement in the sensor and
accelerometer system by accumulating the bins of the histogram
of the normalized proportion of points in the Fig. 8(a) for both
systems. The normalized proportions were then plotted against

Fig. 8. Method to define equivalent thresholds for the sensor and the accelerometers. (a) Proportion of data points versus normalized signal values. (b)
Cumulative proportion of data points versus normalized signal values. At points
A, B, and C, there was an equal proportion of points above and below the sensor
value in both systems. The sensor signal value at point A was chosen to represent
the most sensitive threshold for equivalent movement in the two systems.

their respective normalized values, and overlaid on the same
axes, as shown in Fig. 8(b). The intersections of the two plots
indicate an equal proportion of + indications of movement in
the two systems, designated by A, B, and C. Point A is the lowest
threshold (highest sensitivity). The absolute value of both the
sensor and the accelerometer corresponding to the normalized
value at point A represented the threshold values for each system
to fulfill the two assumptions of the analysis. The overlay plot
in Fig. 8(b) B has been expanded even further for the lowest
200 bins (lowest 20% of the recorded data) of the histogram.
In each recording, we used these thresholds to calculate the
positive and negative indications of movement for the sensor
and the accelerometer system. We constructed a 2 × 2 table
of the + and – indications to calculate the percent agreement
between the indications as follows:
Percent agreement =

(True positives + True negatives)
.
Total points

We then made a series of determinations of the percent agreement while changing the thresholds of both the sensor and the
accelerometer systems over a range of approximately 0.5% of

HELDT AND WARD III: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND-BASED SENSOR TO MONITOR RESPIRATORY AND NONRESPIRATORY MOVEMENT

the full scale value. This was the equivalent of five bins of the
original histogram analysis. For each recording, we determined
the optimal threshold for both the sensor and the accelerometer system that produced the highest percent agreement at the
highest sensitivity.
To determine the overall thresholds in both systems, we then
averaged the optimal thresholds of all the individual recordings of each system, and recalculated the positive indications of
movement based on the average thresholds from all recordings
in both systems. A similar 2 × 2 table was then constructed to
calculate the overall percent agreement between the two systems
over all the recordings for the validation.
Since the sensor had greater sensitivity than the accelerometer
system, we tested the effect of using a lower threshold for the
sensor, while keeping the threshold for the accelerometer system
constant at its mean value across the recordings. This analysis
was based on the use of the accelerometer system as the accepted
standard for indications of movement, with the sensor output
being the dependent variable. This analysis was meant to provide
a noise floor for the sensor wherein the higher sensitivity would
lead to more false positive indications of movement.
c) Movement of the Caretaker: Periods of movements of
the caretaker were noted from the annotated recordings. In preliminary recordings, we noted that caretaker movement produced large excursions in the movement output of the sensor,
as high as two orders of magnitude greater than the largest infant nonrespiratory movement. We chose to use a threshold for
caretaker movement that was five times higher than the average
threshold for nonrespiratory movement (several S.D. greater
than the mean value) for comparison to annotations made in the
recordings in real-time.
4) Statistical Analysis: Validation of the outputs of the sensor
was performed by comparison of the respiratory output, nonrespiratory movements, and movements of the caretaker. Paired
testing was performed to compare differences in values obtained
from the sensor and the comparator signals within recordings,
and for generalizability, two-tailed testing was performed to
compare the average values for all recordings. Parametric testing
was performed where data were normally distributed (t-tests),
and nonparametric testing was performed (Wilcoxon’s signed
rank test or Mann-Whitney rank sum test) for nonnormally distributed data.
a) Agreement of the Respiratory Output and the Edi: Protocol 1 data were used for this part of the validation. Differences
in the respiratory rates from the sensor and the Edi signal in each
recording, and mean respiratory rates derived from the sensor
and the Edi for all the recordings from the group were compared.
We tabulated the lead/lag time of the onset of inspiration from
the data obtained by the visual determination of the response
times. The differences in the mean lead/lag times for the individual recordings and for those of the mean of all recordings
were compared.
b) Agreement of the Nonrespiratory Movement Output of
the Sensor and the Accelerometer System: Protocol 2 was used
for this part of the validation. The optimal thresholds in individual recordings for the sensor and the accelerometer system
that fulfilled the two requirements in that they: 1) produced the

625

maximal agreement for both positive and negative indications
of movement and 2) these thresholds represented the highest
sensitivity. The overall performance of the sensor nonrespiratory movement output was validated by comparing the mean
percent movement and agreement in the individual recordings
with the mean percent movement and agreement that were recalculated in each recording using the group mean thresholds
for each system.
The average percent movement detected at the mean overall
threshold for the sensor was tabulated to estimate the amount of
interference nonrespiratory movement could have produced in
the respiratory output in the infants in both protocols.
c) Agreement of the Sensor and Movement of the Caretaker:
The episodes of caretaker movement were compared to those
identified by the annotations in the recordings. The true and
false positive indications of the episodes were used to compute
the sensitivity and specificity of the sensor to detect caretaker
movement.
III. RESULTS
A. Respiratory Output of the Sensor
The results of the validation based on the comparison of
the respiratory rates are shown in Table II for the infants in
protocol 1. The respiratory rate was highly variable in both
systems reflecting the irregular breathing of these premature
infants. The mean difference between the respiratory rates was
1.2 breaths per min, which was not significant in any individual
recording (p = 0.147, Wilcoxon signed rank test). The group
mean rates were also not significantly different between the
sensor and the Edi (p = 0.577, student t-test).
The time differences for the onset of inspiration are shown in
the table. Data are missing for infant #6, since he required too
much respiratory support to have an adequate amount of artifactfree data for the analysis. We were, however, able to calculate the
percent movement for this infant. The sensor detected the onset
of inspiration an average of 23 ms before the Edi inflection. This
lead-time was significant in all individual recordings (P < 0.001
by paired t-test) and for the mean of all recordings (P < 0.001
by Mann-Whitney rank sum test).
We calculated the percent movement in all 29 recordings in
protocol 1 using the mean threshold for the sensor derived from
the group average in protocol 2 to estimate the potential interference of nonrespiratory movement of the infants with the
respiratory output of the sensor. The percentage of the recording
with potential interference is also shown in Table II. The average
percent of nonrespiratory movement, weighted for the recording times, was 4.7+/−4.5% of the recordings. In nine of the
11 infants, this potential interference was less than 10% of the
recording time, with a maximum of 13.9% in infant #1.
Infants in protocol 1 were all studied in the clinical condition
in which they were being nursed. We found no differences in
the results between the supine and prone positions. Infants in
protocol 2 were studied both uncovered and covered with their
usual blankets. We found no visual difference in the respiratory
output signal when they were covered or uncovered, except
that in several of the infants, the respiratory output signal was

626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

TABLE II
RESPIRATORY RATE, TIME DIFFERENCE FOR INSPIRATION, AND PERCENT OF NONRESPIRATORY MOVEMENT FOR INFANTS IN PROTOCOL 1
Respiratory Rate
Infant
#

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Mean (SD)
Total

Lead/Lag to

EDI

Sensor

Diff in RR

Onset of Inspiration

Mean
(SD)

Mean
(SD)

Mean
(SD)

#Breaths

70.5 (10.5)
68.2 (12.9)
66 (12.3)
62.3 (14.9)
57.4 (12.3)
44.1 (24.5)
56.3 (10.1)
65 (8.6)
46.3 (16.1)
42.7 (10.6)
57.4 (18.4)
55.1 (13.7)

70.1 (6.6)
65.5 (14.9)
70.9 (13.1)
63.5 (8.5)
59.8 (17.3)
48 (14.1)
54.9 (7.6)
66.3 (8.9)
46.4 (19.1)
56.8 (10.3)
58 (17.4)
62.5 (11)

7.7 (8.7)
2.7 (20.9)
−4.9 (9.3)
−1.2 (13.4)
−2.5 (17.4)
−3.9 (23.4)
1.3 (9.7)
1.3 (10.2)
0.3 (10.8)
−14.2 (12)
0.6 (111.9)
−1.2 (13.4)

274
877
471
512
518
—
513
418
365
280
751
4979

Percent Movement
Recording

%of

Mean
(SD)

Length
(min)

Record

−20 (67)
−26 (72)
−2 (53)
−16 (44)
−23 (52)
—
−28 (78)
−26 (74)
−13 (50)
−30 (73)
−42 (77)
−23 (68)

249
99
558
489
827
532
336
485
907
281
639

13.9
1
9.3
10.4
3.1
4
0.2
0.8
3.6
0.9
4.5
4.7 (4.5)

5402

enhanced by the coverings. This may have been due to the larger
reflective surface of the blankets being moved by respiratory
movement than the smaller reflective surface of their body when
they were uncovered.
B. Nonrespiratory Movement
Nonrespiratory movement was characterized for the agreement between the sensor and accelerometer system for individual recordings, and then for agreement at a single threshold for
all recordings. Furthermore, we assessed the amount of movement that would interfere with the respiratory output in infants
in both protocols, and finally, we demonstrated the separation of
non-respiratory movement of the infant and that of the caretaker.
1) Agreement of the Sensor and the Accelerometer System in
Individual Recordings and Overall Performance: The sensitivity of changes in the threshold for the sensor while keeping the
accelerometer threshold constant at the mean group value in the
nine recordings in protocol 2 is shown in Fig. 9. The percent
agreement increased with increasing threshold of the sensor in
all recordings. The mean sensor threshold and mean percent
agreement for all the recordings has been added as the cross
bars. There was better agreement at a higher sensor threshold,
wherein only the larger movements were correlated between the
sensor and accelerometer system. This corroborates the selection of this threshold as the highest sensitivity and selectivity
for the group data.
The poorest agreement, 0.83, was seen in infant #17, who
had a significantly higher amount of movement than the other
infants because of narcotic withdrawal. The poorer correlation
was due to fine tremors that were detected by the accelerometer
system but not the sensor. For the purpose of generalizing the
application of the sensor to these types of infants, we included
the lower threshold in the mean threshold and the percentage
agreement calculations. The lower threshold and agreement can
be seen in infant #17, with increased agreement at a higher
threshold. We chose to use the mean threshold for subsequent
calculations in the second protocol as it was the most sensitive

Fig. 9. Plot of the percentage agreement of the sensor and accelerometer system versus the threshold value of the sensor as it was varied while keeping the
accelerometer threshold constant at the group mean value. The percent agreement increased with increasing sensor threshold in the individual recordings.
The poorest agreement was in infant # 17 who was in narcotic withdrawal.
The bars show the mean overall agreement and the mean sensor threshold. The
overall mean agreement was 90% between the two systems.

threshold and gave the most general estimate of the agreement
for all infants.
Although there was a large variation in the optimal thresholds for both the sensor and the accelerometer system, the use
of the group mean threshold values for the sensor and the accelerometer system produced similar results for the percentage agreement and the percentage movement in the recordings.
The results of the analysis for the thresholds for movement are
shown in Table III. In the individual recordings shown are the
optimal thresholds for the accelerometer system and the sensor,
the percent movement, and the percent agreement. Shown also
are the percent movement and agreement from the recalculation
based on the mean thresholds for both systems for all the recordings. The differences between the percent movement for the
individual recordings and that recalculated for the individual

HELDT AND WARD III: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND-BASED SENSOR TO MONITOR RESPIRATORY AND NONRESPIRATORY MOVEMENT

TABLE III
THRESHOLD AND MOVEMENT DATA FOR INDIVIDUAL RECORDINGS AND MEAN
VALUES FOR ALL RECORDINGS IN PROTOCOL 2
Data For Individual Recordings
Infant
#

12
13
14
15
16
173
18
Mean
S.D.

Threshold Threshold
ACC
Sensor
(mv)
(× 10−3 )
213
124
289
290
195
180
234
218
60

5.7
3.74
5.35
5.68
4.52
1.41
3.11
4.22
1.58

Data For Group

%Movement
%Movement
At Optimal Agreement At Mean
Agreement
Threshold1
Threshold2
6.9
6.2
18.1
5
11.5
44.5
8.9
14.44
13.97

0.97
0.925
0.96
0.97
0.93
0.83
0.94
0.93
0.05

5.6
3.9
18.6
7.22
11.7
47.5
9.9
14.91
15.16

0.92
0.88
0.89
0.94
0.92
0.79
0.93
0.90
0.5

1

Optimal threshold for each recording was used.
Mean threshold for all of the recordings were used and recalculated data are shown.
3
Infant with narcotic withdrawal. Note lower threshold and higher percent movement.
2

recordings using the mean thresholds were not significantly different (p = 0.902 by Mann-Whitney rank sum test). The percent
agreement averaged 0.93 in the individual recordings, and as expected, averaged less, 0.90, for recalculated data based on the
mean thresholds. This difference, although small, was significant (p < 0.01 by t-test).
The percent movement in the infants in the second protocol
is shown in Table III. The infants in this group were larger, were
not on ventilatory support, and had more movement, averaging
14.9 +/− 15.1% of the recordings. The percent movement was
less than 10% in seven of the nine recordings.
2) Agreement With Caretaker Movement: There were 187
episodes of caretaker movement identified by the annotations in
the recordings. There were 184 true positive indications identified by the sensor, with three false positive indications, probably
due to movement of the isolette. There were no false negative indications. The sensitivity and specificity of the sensor to identify
episodes of caretaker movement was therefore 98%.
C. Overall System Performance
Fig. 10 shows a composite of the raw phase A signal, the
separate movement outputs and respiratory output of the sensor and the algorithms, the Edi signal for comparison, and the
respiratory rates derived from the sensor and the Edi. The movement output has been plotted on a log scale to show the large
dynamic range of the sensor, and the mean thresholds for the
infant and caretaker movements have been added. The sensor
separated isolated nonrespiratory and caretaker movement using
the thresholds. Caretaker movement could not be distinguished
from caretaker movement + infant movement, as the two were
related. In either, despite large excursions in the phase A signal,
and that passed through several wavelengths, the respiratory rate
from the sensor was stable. There were five episodes in which
there was a large difference between respiratory rates derived
from the sensor and the Edi, marked by stars in the figure. These
episodes were related to noise in the Edi signal that caused a
malfunction of the respiratory rate determination by the Edi
during periods of apnea. There discrepancies were seen in the

627

fourth and fifth episodes, again during apnea which was not as
pronounced.
IV. DISCUSSION
We have validated that this noncontacting sensor can give
separate and reliable outputs for respiratory and nonrespiratory
movements of infants, and those of their caretakers. The use of
reflected ultrasound for physiological monitoring has been described before. The sensor we describe had the advantage of the
greater bandwidth necessary for the wider range of movements
than respiratory movements alone. This was made possible by
the in-phase and quadrature phase detection scheme prior to filtering. Previous reports of noncontacting ultrasound-based systems for detection of respiratory and nonrespiratory movements
made use of phase lock loop (PLL) detection that varied the
frequency of the transmitter so as to maintain a fixed number of
wavelengths of ultrasound between the sensor and subject [16],
[17]. We decided not to use this scheme since the bandwidth
and loop gain of the PLL also limits the operation of the system to prespecified respiratory rates, and may require resetting
or repositioning of the sensor to maintain the lock of the loop.
Others used an I & Q detector but suggested the use of higher
ultrasound frequencies (up to 600 kHz) to be able to capture
a larger range of movement [18]. These higher frequencies are
impractical for proper propagation and reflectance. Two other
groups used a fixed transmitter frequency and phase demodulation by analog mixers, which necessitated filtering that limited
the sensor to an expected movement range for respiration only
[19], [20].
Instead, we used a fixed transmitter frequency and an in-phase
and quadrature detection scheme that allows measurement of
movement with a resolution of a very small fraction of a wavelength, and that can track the phase difference between the
transmitted and received signals over several wavelengths. This
eliminated the bandwidth limitations and allowed detection of
the phase information containing very low frequencies associated with breathing (down to apnea), and the higher frequencies
associated with non-respiratory and caretaker movement.
Although distortion with larger nonrespiratory and caretaker
movements distorted the respiratory output, this was found to
be a small percentage of time of the records made under typical clinical circumstances, even in infants with a large range
of weights and who were vigorous. Most nonrespiratory movements were of very short duration, and did not interfere with the
determination of respiratory rate. This suggests that the threshold for nonrespiratory movement may have been set too low to
be an indicator of “significant” movement for this application
of the sensor.
We were surprised to see that the sensor performed equally
well with the infants covered, uncovered, and bundled, and in
either the supine or prone positions. We did not change the
clinical conditions in which we found the infants, so that we
could assess the overall performance of the sensor. Our analysis
was not biased by the selection of the data files or data segments
for any position or coverings. During the recordings, we also did
not interfere with the routine nursing care the infant received;
the episodes of care were clearly documented by the caretaker

628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 10. Composite of the sensor outputs, Edi, respiratory rates from the sensor and Edi in 1040 g infant. Even during times of both nonrespiratory and caretaker
movement, the respiratory rate derived from the sensor was stable. The episodes of major discrepancy between the rates (stars added to the figure) were due to the
noise in the Edi signal during periods of apnea that caused the rate algorithm to malfunction.

movement output of the sensor. The infants in protocol 1 were
more often bundled and were on ventilatory support, which
could account for a lower amount of overall movement.
We have demonstrated that the sensor can reliably detect the
onset of inspiration compared to the electrical activity of the
diaphragm. The rapid response time, the small amount of interference from nonrespiratory movement and its reliable identification by the sensor shows that it is feasible to use the sensor
as a trigger to synchronize a mechanical ventilator with spontaneous breathing. The nonrespiratory movement interfering with
the operation of the sensor that we observed lasted only short
periods of time with immediate recovery of the respiratory output of the sensor. These movements could be an inoperable
condition for the trigger that would change the mode to nonsynchronized ventilation, as is presently used. Since the sensor
makes no contact with the patient and does not need to be attached to a leaky airway, the trigger could find great utility in
noninvasive ventilation.
The validation of the detection of nonrespiratory movement
suggests many uses for the sensor, including a monitor of overall movement, detection of seizures, assessment of the effects
of sedation and recovery from anesthesia in both humans and

animals, sleep state determination, and the objective assessment
of infants being treated for drug withdrawal. In many of these
applications, the noncontacting nature of the sensor would be
very helpful in developing a number of monitoring products. Adjustments in the threshold for different types of nonrespiratory
movement may be necessary, and could improve the agreement
that we saw at the highest sensitivity in these infants.
The accurate detection of caretaker movement could be very
useful in assessing the amount of care an infant is receiving,
and the physiological effects of handling. In the practical clinical situation, the sensor does not need to function at times of
caretaker movement, since alarms of physiological monitors are
usually disabled during handling, and caretakers rely on their visual observation of respiration during handling. The sensor can
provide objective documentation of caretaker activity that could
be useful for work-flow studies and documenting the acuity of
care.
Finally, the sensor is inexpensive to construct from readily
available materials. Although the prototype used for these studies was implemented in TTL technology, newer technologies
could be used to reduce the circuit size, lower power consumption, and add real-time computation of the respiratory,

HELDT AND WARD III: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND-BASED SENSOR TO MONITOR RESPIRATORY AND NONRESPIRATORY MOVEMENT

nonrespiratory, and caretaker movements. With further development, the sensor should be applicable to older children and
adults.
V. CONCLUSION
We have described and validated a single, noncontacting sensor for respiratory, nonrespiratory, and caretaker movement in
infants in an intensive care setting. The sensor could detect the
onset of inspiration 23 ms prior to a comparative measure of
the electrical activity of the diaphragm, with adequate accuracy
to be used as a trigger mechanism to synchronize a mechanical
ventilator to the spontaneous breathing of the infant. The nonrespiratory movement output had an agreement of 0.9 with an
independent measure of movement by accelerometers. The detection of caretaker movement had a sensitivity and specificity
of 0.98 compared to visual annotation of caretaker movements
during our recordings. The separate outputs for the nonrespiratory and caretaker movements may be useful for a number of
other applications for the clinical assessment of infants and their
care.
The sensor described was used in infants for this validation.
With modifications in the design of the sensor head and postdetection filtering, it could be used in older children and adults.
The sensor, as part of a synchronizer for adult and pediatric
ventilators, could promote the present trend to use noninvasive
ventilation as an alternative to invasive ventilation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the nursing and respiratory
care staff of the Intensive Care Nursery at the University of
California, San Diego Medical Center, for their assistance in
this study. They would also like to thank Benjamin Castro, RRT,
for help in setting up the Servo-i ventilator for the comparison
signals.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Mukai, “A remote monitor of bed patient cardiac vibration, respiration,
and movement,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2009, pp. 5191–5194.
[2] W. Hu, “Noncontact accurate measurement of cardiopulmonary activity
using a compact quadrature Doppler radar sensor,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 725–735, Mar. 2014.
[3] L. J. Goldman, “Nasal airflow and thoracoabdominal motion in children
using infrared thermographic video processing,” Ped. Pulmonol., vol. 47,
pp. 476–486, 2012.
[4] P. Arlotto, “An ultrasonic contactless sensor for breathing monitoring,”
Sensors, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 15371–15386, Aug. 2014.
[5] Y. Yamana, “A sensor for monitoring pulse rate, respiration rhythm, and
body movement in bed,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 5323–5326.
[6] G. Bernstein, “Airway leak size in neonates and autocycling of three flowtriggered ventilators,” Crit. Care Med., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1739–1744,
1995.
[7] G. Bernstein, “Response time and reliability of three neonatal patient
triggered ventilators,” Amer. Rev. Resp. Dis., vol. 148, no. 1, pp. 358–364,
1993.
[8] G. Bernstein et al., “Increased and more consistent tidal volumes during synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation in newborn infants,”
Amer. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., vol. 150, no. 5, pp. 1444–1448, Nov.
1994.

629

[9] D. R. Spriggs, “Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor administered
as a 24-h intravenous infusion: A phase I and pharmacologic study,” J.
Natl. Cancer Inst., vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 1039–44, 1988.
[10] P. I. Terrill, “Application of recurrence quantification analysis to automatically estimate infant sleep states using a single channel of respiratory
data,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 851–865, Aug. 2012.
[11] L. Adde, “Early prediction of cerebral palsy by computer-based video
analysis of general movements: A feasibility study,” Dev. Med. Child
Neurol., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 773–778, 2010.
[12] F. Heinze, “Movement analysis by accelerometry of newborns and infants
for the early detection of movement disorders due to infantile cerebral
palsy,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 765–772, 2010.
[13] TLVs and BEIs, “Threshold limit values for chemical substances and
physical agents,” in Proc. Amer. Conf. Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 1998.
[14] G. Emeriaud, “Diaphragm electrical activity during expiration in mechanically ventilated infants,” Pediatric Res., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 705–710, 2006.
[15] J. Beck, “Characterization of neural breathing pattern in spontaneous
breathing infants,” Pediatric Res., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 606–613, 2011.
[16] H. Karsh, “Motion monitor,” U.S. Patent 4 122 427, Oct. 24, 1978.
[17] R. B. Northrup, “Ultrasonic respiration/convulsion monitoring apparatus
and method for its use,” U.S. Patent 4 197 856, Apr. 15, 1980.
[18] L. P. Barany, “Ultrasonic non-contact motion monitoring system,” U.S.
Patent 5 220 922, Jun. 22, 1993.
[19] P. D. Geiger and L. H. Hudgins, “Stand-off non-invasive acoustic baby
monitor,” U.S. Patent 6 150 941, Nov. 21, 2000.
[20] Z. Seabron, “Ultrasonic monitor,” U.S. Patent 6 248 068, Jun. 19, 2001.

Gregory P. Heldt (M’14) received the undergraduate education in chemistry from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, and the M.D. degree from the
School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, CA, in 1974.
He completed his pediatric residency at the University of California, San Francisco, CA, in 1977,
and Fellowship in neonatology and pulmonology at
the Cardiovascular Research Institute, San Francisco,
in 1980. He was a faculty at UCSF until 1985, and
has been at UCSD since. He became Professor of pediatrics in 1994. His research interests are the development of new technologies
for mechanical ventilation of infants, specifically high-frequency ventilation
and patient-triggered ventilation, pulmonary function testing, and development
of artificial pulmonary surfactant therapies for respiratory distress. He has collaborated with the Hewlett-Packard Corp. in the development of infant monitor
systems, the Infrasonics Corp., San Diego, in the development of the Star-Calc
pulmonary function system and the Star-Sync ventilator trigger for the Infant
Star ventilator, and the Discovery Laboratories Corp., in the development and
FDA approval of Surfaxin, an artificial surfactant. He is actively involved in the
research training of the Fellows in neonatology at UCSD.
Mr. Heldt is a Senior Member of the Pediatric Academic Society and an
Active Member of the Institutional Review Board at UCSD.

Raymond J. Ward III received the B.S. degree in
physiology and neuroscience from the University of
California, San Diego, CA, USA, in 2002.
From 2002 to 2004, he was the Surgical Laboratory Manager at Ichor Medical Systems and assisted
in the creation and testing of an electroporation drug
delivery device. Since 2004, he has worked in the Division of Neonatology, University of California San
Diego Medical Center, San Diego, as the Chief Respiratory Therapeutics Coordinator where he is responsible for the creation and operation of a cGMP lung
compliance assay. He aided Discovery Laboratories in the development and
FDA approval of Surfaxin, an artificial surfactant. He also aids in the training of
fellows in mechanical ventilation of infants and associated pulmonary technologies. In 2008, he founded BioData Innovation Systems, a California corporation.
He led BioData in obtaining a successfully funded Phase I STTR grant funded
by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and progressed the company’s
lead product, the sensor described in this paper. BioData submitted a patent
application with the USPTO for the sensor in June 2015.

