4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

EEG Source Imaging Enhances the Decoding
of Complex Right-Hand Motor Imagery Tasks
Bradley J. Edelman, Bryan Baxter, and Bin He∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: Sensorimotor-based brain–computer interfaces
(BCIs) have achieved successful control of real and virtual devices
in up to three dimensions; however, the traditional sensor-based
paradigm limits the intuitive use of these systems. Many control
signals for state-of-the-art BCIs involve imagining the movement of
body parts that have little to do with the output command, revealing
a cognitive disconnection between the user’s intent and the action
of the end effector. Therefore, there is a need to develop techniques
that can identify with high spatial resolution the self-modulated
neural activity reflective of the actions of a helpful output device.
Methods: We extend previous EEG source imaging (ESI) work to
decoding natural hand/wrist manipulations by applying a novel
technique to classifying four complex motor imaginations of the
right hand: flexion, extension, supination, and pronation. Results:
We report an increase of up to 18.6% for individual task classification and 12.7% for overall classification using the proposed ESI
approach over the traditional sensor-based method. Conclusion:
ESI is able to enhance BCI performance of decoding complex righthand motor imagery tasks. Significance: This study may lead to the
development of BCI systems with naturalistic and intuitive motor
imaginations, thus facilitating broad use of noninvasive BCIs.
Index Terms—Brain–computer interface (BCI), brain mapping,
EEG source imaging (ESI), motor imagery (MI), neuroimaging.

I. INTRODUCTION
OR those people suffering from severe neurological impairments, brain–computer interface (BCI) technology has
provided an alternative means of communication with the environment outside of the body’s natural neuromuscular pathways
[1]. BCIs using intracortically implanted electrode arrays have
allowed subjects with severe damage to their descending motor
circuitry to successfully control robotic prosthetics with anthropomorphic movement to complete common everyday tasks [2],
[3]. These systems are able to exploit the high spatial specificity that can be achieved by targeting individual neurons or
neuronal ensembles and the tuning properties of cells in the
primary motor cortex (M1). For noninvasive BCIs, the spatial
resolution of detectable signals is significantly lower than intra-

F

Manuscript received February 28, 2015; revised May 12, 2015 and June
27, 2015; accepted July 24, 2015. Date of publication July 24, 2015; date of
current version December 17, 2015. This work was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under Grant CBET-1264782 and Grant IGERT
DGE-1069104, and in part by the National Institutes of Health under Grant R01
EB006433. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
B. J. Edelman and B. Baxter are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota.
∗ B. He is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Institute
for Engineering in Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
USA (e-mail: binhe@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2467312

cortical recordings, restricting analysis to higher level signals
originating from larger populations of synchronized neurons
such as the P300 [4]–[6], steady-state visual evoked potentials
[7]–[9], slow cortical potentials [10], and sensorimotor rhythms
(SMRs) [11], [12]. Of particular promise, SMR-based BCIs
have accomplished control of both virtual and real objects in
up to three dimensions by identifying unique spatiotemporal
dynamics of oscillatory activity originating in the sensorimotor
cortex [12]–[18].
Control signals extracted for SMR BCIs are founded on the
voluntary modulation of frequency-specific electrical activity in
M1. Neurons within the sensorimotor cortex maintain a resting synchrony in the alpha/mu (8–13 Hz) and beta (13–30 Hz)
bands that represents an idle motor state. Upon performing motor imagery (MI), in which a motor action is imagined but not
executed, local populations of neurons responsible for the imagination desynchronize to process the task and result in a decrease of alpha–beta power. This local desynchronization is accompanied by increased synchronization in the noncontrolling
hemisphere or near the midline. These phenomena are termed
event-related desynchronization (ERD) and event-related synchronization (ERS), respectively, and occur along the motor
homunculus according to the topographic organization of M1
[17]. It is the identification of ERD and ERS among the different
recording electrodes overlying M1 that allow the system to recognize which task a user is performing. The BCI then translates
the identified MI task into a particular action of the end effector.
Despite the success of SMR BCIs, there are various limitations regarding a user’s ability to achieve successful control.
Of foremost importance, electroencephalography (EEG) itself
suffers from the volume conduction effect, which blurs and
distorts neuroelectric signals as they travel from the cortical
surface to the scalp [19]. The consequence is a smearing of
the ERD and ERS generated in response to MI tasks from adjacent somatotopic regions. The projected scalp patterns from
these nearby cortical regions have high spatial correlation and
make it exceedingly difficult to distinguish which task is being
performed. Therefore, one of the major challenges for highdimensional BCIs is to overcome the low spatial resolution of
EEG by finding optimal combinations of MI tasks and EEG electrodes used to decode the independent activity. In this sense, the
most straightforward approach to increasing the dimensionality
of SMR BCIs is to utilize the somatotopic organization of M1
by finding MI tasks, which activate regions of the cortex that
are distant enough to be separated by the recording electrodes,
such as the left and right hand, feet and tongue [20]–[23].
However, this often leads to a cognitive disconnection between the MI task being performed and the corresponding action

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

EDELMAN et al.: ESI ENHANCES THE DECODING OF COMPLEX RIGHT-HAND MOTOR IMAGERY TASK

of the output device. For example, in a representative horizontal
1-D paradigm, left- and right-hand MI is used to drive a computer cursor to the left and right, respectively. These tasks are
intuitive and the user’s motor intent is effectively reflected by
the movement of the cursor. When adding a second dimension,
feet and tongue MI tasks are often used to drive the vertical
movement of the cursor. These tasks are chosen because they,
in addition to right- and left-hand MI, generate spatially distinct
patterns in sensor space. However, unlike the horizontal movement, there is no clear mental link between imagining movement
of the feet and tongue with the up and down movement of an
output device. Therefore, in those high-dimensional paradigms
that are able to achieve successful control, the MI tasks used
are unnatural and could significantly benefit from new imaginations that better resemble the resulting action of the end effector.
Despite these shortcomings, various techniques targeting user
training as well as neural signal processing are available to drive
SMR BCI toward more realistic control.
Over the past decade, He and colleagues have pursued a
source-analysis-based BCI approach [22]–[26]. EEG source
imaging (ESI) is used to counteract the volume conduction effect
by projecting the scalp potential readings onto a source space
representing the geometry of the brain. These techniques reconstruct electrical activity of the gyral and sulcal folds of the brain
by modeling populations of cells as equivalent dipoles [24], [25]
or current density distributions [22]–[24], [26]. Spatial filters are
then generated to determine the relationship between the recording electrodes and dipoles in order to trace electrical activity on
the scalp back to specific neuroanatomical structures. ESI has
recently received considerable attention in the BCI community
because it can identify MI tasks with equal or greater performance than the sensor domain analysis [23], [26]. It is thought
that by reconstructing the current density on the cortical surface,
a priori physiological postulates can inform regions of the brain
that are more likely responsible for generating the scalp EEG.
In this manner, the source transformed data can be constrained
to include information that is more highly correlated with the
task being performed, thus reducing extraneous and noisy data
[22], [27], [28]. The ability to isolate patches of the cortex on an
anatomical basis provides an opportunity to further exploit the
somatotopic properties of M1 and extract control signals that
are more intuitive for a user to perform.
For BCI applications, detecting downstream actions can
vastly increase the dimensionality of the technology and provide
the means to customize systems by integrating tasks specific to a
user’s particular needs. Prosthetic arm control using MI signals
has been a long sought after goal for both the rehabilitation of
injured brain regions (e.g., stroke patients) and the replacement
of limbs that can no longer be controlled (e.g., spinal cord injury,
amputation). However, many of the current control signals are
unable to provide the user with intuitive and successful control
of these devices. For fine motor control of a robotic arm/hand,
it would be optimal for the user to perform an MI task involving
a particular manipulation of one’s own hand and to then have
the same action performed by the robot. Despite this great need,
few studies have examined the possibility of separating control
signals of complex hand MI tasks for SMR BCI use. These

5

analyses have been limited to sensor space data and often have
limited classification schemes with modest results.
In summary, the following issues that need to be addressed
for SMR BCIs to progress toward everyday use are twofold.
1) The low spatial resolution of EEG significantly limits the
number of MI tasks that can be used to successfully control
an SMR BCI.
2) MI tasks that generate distinct and usable control signals
are not intuitively matched to the action of the output
device and make it difficult to provide neurofeedback reflective of the user’s intent.
In this paper, we have examined the separability of MI tasks
involving four different manipulations of the right hand: flexion,
extension, supination, and pronation. These tasks were chosen
to represent complex actions involved in fine motor control of
the hand which could be applied to both rehabilitative and prosthetic control purposes. With the previous success of ESI for
discriminating MI tasks, it is our hypothesis that reconstructing
the electrical activity on the cortical surface will allow us to
isolate regions containing more discriminable information regarding specific MI tasks of the hand. We greatly improved the
discrimination of these tasks by using a source-based approach
beyond the peak accuracy achieved by the sensor-based method.
II. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND SETUP
A. MI Task
Five human subjects (three males, average age of 25.5 ±
9.7 years) with previous BCI experience participated in this
study with written consent to an experimental protocol approved
by the University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board. Subjects were seated in a comfortable chair in front of a computer
screen and instructed to perform 2-Hz self-paced MI of righthand flexion, extension, supination, or pronation. Each trial was
designed as follows: a “rest” icon initially appeared on the screen
for 3 s. This was followed by 3 s of a target indicating which MI
task to perform. During this period, the subject was instructed
to focus on the computer screen and clear their mind as preparation for the upcoming task. Finally, a 4-s “go” cue was presented
during which the subject continuously performed the specified
MI task [see Fig. 1(a) and (b)]. A 1-s intertrial interval was
appended after the task for additional rest.
For the duration of each run, subjects supported their right
arm on the arm rest of the chair and maintained their right hand
in a neutral position defined by aligning the wrist to the forearm,
with the hand relaxed and thumb oriented upward. Prior to the
MI runs, subjects performed motor execution runs of the same
tasks as a motor priming stage. During execution, the subject
was instructed to focus on the sensation involved in each task
which was to be mentally recalled during the imagination.
Flexion and extension (FE) and supination and pronation (SP)
MI tasks were paired together and randomized within each run.
Each session was composed of four runs of 20 trials for each
pair of tasks. The order in which the subjects performed the
FE and SP runs alternated for successive sessions. Each subject
participated in four sessions on four separate days, with a total
of 160 trials allotted to each MI task. The analysis pipeline of

6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

parameter and W is a weighting matrix:
min ||Ax − b||2 + λ||W x||2
x

Fig. 1. (a) Trial structure for collecting the MI task data. Flexion and extension,
and supination and pronation tasks were paired together within a run. Each run
contained 20 trials for each pair of tasks (ten trials per task). (b) Subjects were
asked to perform MI of flexion, extension, supination or pronation. (c) Seventeen
electrodes overlying the motor cortex were used in this analysis.

the proposed ESI and traditional sensor-based approaches are
outlined in Fig. 2 and described in the following sections.
B. EEG Preprocessing
Raw EEG was acquired from 64 channels located according
to the standard 10–20 electrode system using a SynAmpsRT
amplifier (Neuroscan Compumedics, Singen, Germany) at a
sampling frequency of 1 kHz. The 17 electrodes (FC3, FC1,
FCz, FC2, FC4, C5, C3, C1, Cz, C2, C4, C6, CP3, CP1, CPz,
CP2, CP4) overlying the motor cortex, highlighted in Fig. 1(c),
were utilized for this analysis since we were only concerned
with motor related activity [24]–[26]. The recorded data were
separated into four separate sets, each containing only the trials
of one of the MI tasks. EEG recordings were downsampled to
100 Hz and bandpass filtered between 2 and 30 Hz using a zerophase finite impulse response filter. Trials containing artifactual
behavior (i.e., jaw clenching, muscle movement, electrode disconnections, etc.) were removed by visual inspection. A surface
Laplacian was then applied to the remaining trials to enhance
focal activity related to the MI tasks. Given that the entire trial
does not contain information relevant to the MI task, only the
data from 1 s prior to the beginning of the task to 1 s after the
task ended was kept for further analysis.
C. Cortical Current Density Estimation
In order to convert data from the sensor domain to the source
domain, an EEG forward model was first generated to describe
the electrical conductance between the scalp sampling sites and
the modeled dipolar sources of the brain. Solving the “EEG
forward problem” generates a transfer matrix, or lead field, that
relates the activity in source space to that of sensor space. This
association can be represented by the linear system in (1), where
b represents the recorded scalp data, A the lead field, x the source
activity, and n the measurement noise:
b = Ax + n

(1)

Solving the “EEG inverse problem” consists of solving (1) for
x through the process described in (2), where λ is a regularization

(2)

In theory, the optimal solution of x would be one that minimizes the residual between the estimated and recorded scalp
topographies in the L2 norm least-squares sense, as depicted by
the first term in (2). However, because the number of dipoles
is often much larger than the number of electrodes, there are
many source distributions that can generate similar patterns on
the scalp. Tikhonov regularization was therefore employed to
further constrain the solution to find the x which minimized the
residual as well as the energy of the source solution [29]. This
additional constraint is represented by the second term in (2);
the influence of the two terms was balanced by the regularization parameter λ, which was found using the L-curve method.
For the L2 norm case, the analytic solution to (2) gives rise to
the optimal estimate of the source distribution x̂, indicated by
(3). This transformation, therefore, takes the lead field and scalp
potentials as inputs and provides as an output the estimated
cortical current density.

−1
b
(3)
x̂ = AT AAT + λW
When W is simply the identity matrix, this solution is referred
to as the minimum norm estimate (MNE). The MNE, however, is
biased by the fact that superficial dipoles will inherently project
more strongly to the scalp. This effect was corrected by applying
a set of weights to the dipoles such that the influence of dipole
depth was reduced; this approach thus becomes the weighted
MNE (WMNE) [30].
For this analysis, the Colin27 MRI average brain [31] was
used to convert between sensor and source space. The structural MRI volume was initially segmented into five surface layers (white matter, gray matter, cerebral spinal fluid, skull, and
scalp). The segmented gray matter was then tessellated into a
triangular mesh composed of 8325 equivalent dipoles representing discrete locations on the cortex for which the current density
would be solved. The dipoles were fixed with an orientation perpendicular to the gray matter surface to maintain neurophysiological consistency with pyramidal neurons that are responsible
for generating the signals detected by EEG. A three-shell conduction model was created to represent the scalp, skull, and
inner cerebral tissues using the boundary element method [32],
[33], with conductivity values assigned in the ratio of 1:1/15:1
[34]–[36]. Electrode locations were coregistered with the skin
using standard anatomical landmarks on the head. The concept
of ESI is depicted in Fig. 2.
D. Region of Interest Selection
Where similar ESI studies have selected a region of interest
(ROI) by identifying particular gyral landmarks on subject specific cortex models [28], [37], we elected to use a purely datadriven approach to select the right-hand ROI since the same
template brain was used for all subjects [38]. In this approach,
the preprocessed EEG from all four MI tasks was compiled into
a single dataset. This compiled dataset, therefore, contains EEG
from all of the MI activity of the right hand.

EDELMAN et al.: ESI ENHANCES THE DECODING OF COMPLEX RIGHT-HAND MOTOR IMAGERY TASK

7

Fig. 2. (Bottom left) Analysis pipeline describing the traditional sensor and proposed source-based approach. Time–frequency features were extracted from the
17 electrode waveforms for classification in the sensor method; time–frequency features were extracted from the waveforms from dipoles within the designated
ROI for the source-based method. (Top right) Schematic of ESI; using anatomical MRI data, a three-layer realistic-geometry numerical head model was constructed
to solve the EEG inverse problem and project the scalp-recorded EEG onto a cortical surface.

Independent component analysis (ICA) was then used to
decompose the compiled dataset into temporally independent
sources using the extended InfoMax algorithm [39]. The output of ICA decomposition is composed of an Ne × Ne weight
matrix and an Ne × t activation matrix, where Ne denotes the
number of scalp electrodes and t the number of time points of the
original data. Each column of the inverse weight matrix represents the scalp topography associated with a single independent
component (IC) and has a corresponding activation sequence
within the EEG envelope, indicated by the rows of the activation matrix.
The alpha/mu band ERD has long been shown to be indicative
of gross limb activity [17], [40], [41]. Therefore, to determine
which of these components contained the motor activity, we
constructed a time–frequency representation (TFR) that characterizes the “ideal” event-related activity associated with a motor
task, as displayed in Fig. 3(a). Based on the data segments that
we chose to include for this analysis, each trial contains three
blocks: 1 s of preparation, 4 s of MI, and 1 s of post-task. In the
preparation and post-task blocks, we assigned a value of one to
the 8–13 Hz frequency band to represent the idling motor activity that would result from not performing MI. During the task
block, the 8–13 Hz activity was assigned to zero to signify an
ERD associated with performing a motor task. The TFR of each
component was found according to the methodology explained

in subsequent sections, averaged across trials and normalized to
its peak value.
The single component that displayed the highest time–
frequency correlation with this ideal MI event-related behavior
was selected as that which was thought to be responsible for
the overlapping right-hand source activity. Fig. 3(b) illustrates
the TFRs from a representative subject for the three components with the highest correlation to the task, along with their
respective component topographies. The selected component
topography was then mapped onto a template brain using the
WMNE and thresholded at 75% of the peak value to identify
dipole locations on the cortex to be included in the ROI. The
selected IC topographies and ROIs for all subjects are displayed
in Fig. 3(c).
E. Feature Extraction and Selection
Features from the individual preprocessed datasets for each
of the MI task were extracted independently. For sensor analysis, features were extracted from all electrode time series, and
for source analysis, only those dipole time series within the cortical ROI (see Fig. 2). TFRs of the selected waveforms were
obtained using a Morlet wavelet approach. The wavelet was
initially designed at a central frequency fc where its temporal
resolution, or manifested length, is defined by the full-width at

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 3. (a) Ideal time–frequency response of motor task activity based on known neurophysiologic principles. A strong idling synchrony occurs in the alpha/mu
band prior to the task (before 0 s). An alpha/mu desynchronization (ERD) occurs while performing the motor task (0–4 s) and resynchronizes after the task (after
4 s). (b) IC topographies and TFRs of the IC activation time series for the three ICs with a correlation coefficient (CC) above 0.50 with the idealized task for a
representative subject. In this case, the right most IC (#4) was selected as the IC containing the motor information. (c) Selected IC topography and corresponding
cortical ROI for each of the five subjects. For each subject, the selected IC topography was mapped onto a template brain using the WMNE and thresholded at
75% of the peak value to find the ROI boundaries. The blue arrow on the right highlights the hand knob of the precentral gyrus that is contained in all ROIs.

half-maximum (FWHM) of its Gaussian kernel, as seen in (4).
The central frequency was chosen as 1 Hz, and the FWHM of
the Gaussian kernel at the central frequency, FWHMf c , was
chosen as 3 s [42]. The wavelet’s length was then scaled for all
other frequencies f by means of (5) to better capture the varying components of oscillatory activity. The wavelet coefficients
were then calculated via (6) at 0.5-Hz intervals and convolved
with the selected waveforms.
FWHMf c
σt,f c = 
8 ln(2)
σt,f =

σt,f c fc
f

(4)
(5)

2

t
√
1
2σ 2
ψf = (σt,f π)− 2 · e t , f · e2π if c t

(6)

Time–frequency features were extracted by breaking the
TFRs into time windows and frequency bands that maximized
classification accuracy. The most discriminable features were
found using the Mahalanobis distance (MD), (7), a statistical
measure of similarity between two distributions, X1 and X2 ,
based on their respective means, μ1 and μ2 , and the pooled
covariance, ࢣ:
−1
(μ1 − μ2 )T
d2 = (μ1 − μ2 )

(7)

Finding individual features that yield the largest MDs is not
optimal because when combined together to train a classifier,
destructive interference may decrease the discriminability of the
shared feature space. Therefore, we elected to use an iterative
search method to find the top features which synergistically
maximize the MD for any number of selected features [38], [43].
This approach found each successive feature by considering
all remaining individual features and determined that which
maximized the MD to be the next best feature. This practice
ranks features for each task in multivariate space and ensures that
the optimal combination of features is selected for classification
analysis.
The MD, however, is best suited for binary applications, and
therefore, in order to find those features that would best separate the four MI tasks examined in this study, a one-versus-rest
approach was applied to each task. In these cases, X1 represents the feature space from one of the four tasks, and X2
the compiled feature space from the three other tasks. Hence,
the features identified using the one-versus-rest approaches are
those that were most unique to any one of the MI tasks. The
most discriminable features from each task were concatenated
and extracted from all tasks for the four-class classification to
ensure that the same features were being compared.
A fivefold cross-validation procedure was implemented using
80% training and 20% testing sets. For each of the five folds,
new features were extracted from each of the four tasks in the

EDELMAN et al.: ESI ENHANCES THE DECODING OF COMPLEX RIGHT-HAND MOTOR IMAGERY TASK

9

Fig. 4. (a) Overall classification rate of the four MI tasks using the sensor- and source-based methods plotted as a function of the number of top features used.
The maximum accuracy for both methods was achieved when using 13 of the top features. (b) Confusion matrices for the sensor- and source-based methods at
their respective peak overall accuracy (Flex—flexion, Ext—extension, sup—Supination, Pro—pronation). (c) Paired t-test results comparing the two methods on
the individual task and overall basis at the peak overall accuracy of each domain (∗ p < 0.05). Bar graphs are shown with standard error.

training set and applied to the corresponding testing set for
classification.

on all sensor waveforms and compared with the proposed source
imaging method.

F. Classification
A MD-based classifier was used for the four-class classification analysis [40]. The classifier
 was constructed by finding
the mean, μi , and covariance, i , of the training samples from
each of the four tasks (i = 4). For any testing sample y, the MD
was found between each of the four class distributions and was
ultimately assigned to the class which minimized the distance,
as described by:

 −1
(y − μi )T
(8)
min (y − μi )
i

i

For the testing samples belonging to a particular task, the
classifier’s output was compared with the true class in a standard confusion matrix. Classification accuracy for each task was
computed by dividing the number of correctly identified samples by the total number of testing samples belonging to the
same class. Thus, the classification percentages sum to 100%
along each row of the confusion matrix. To obtain an overall
classification measure, the sum of the values along the diagonal
of the confusion matrix was divided by the total number of samples in the entire testing set. The same analysis was performed

III. RESULTS
A. Classification Accuracy
The group-averaged overall classification accuracy is displayed in Fig. 4(a) as a function of the feature space dimension. Using few features, classification in the two domains is
nearly identical; however, as the number of features increases,
there emerges a clear separation between the sensor space and
source space accuracy, peaking at 69.5% and 82.2%, respectively. Both domains achieved their maximum overall accuracy when using 13 of the most discriminable features. An adjusted Wald’s test was used to calculate a confidence interval
of 25.8±7.5% for chance performance of the classifier [44], the
upper bound of which is plotted in Fig. 4(a) alongside the classification rates. The confusion matrices in Fig. 4(b) illuminate
the group-level classification results for the four tasks at each
domain’s respective maximum accuracy. On the individual task
basis, the source space classification outperformed that of sensor
space for all four tasks with an improvement rate between 6.6%
and 18.6%.

10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 5. (a) Spatial distribution of the top features for each task within the ROI in a representative subject. The size of the sphere indicates the contribution of that
dipole location for separating a given task from the other three, with the largest sphere indicating the strongest representation. (b) To map the ROI, each dipole
within the ROI was assigned to the task which had the largest representation in the source space. (c) Spatial distribution of supination was projected onto a rendered
brain to visualize the spatial distribution on the cortex. Warm colors signify the larger sphere sizes depicted in (a), whereas cool colors signify smaller spheres. (d)
Centroids of each MI task’s distribution localized on or near the hand knob of the precentral gyrus. The white dotted line indicates the central sulcus.

Fig. 4(c) displays the group-level statistical results of each
of the four MI tasks at the maximum overall accuracy achieved
in the sensor and source domains. The sensor domain outperformed the source domain in only three subject-imagination
pairings; pronation in S1 and S4, and extension in S2. The overall peak accuracies in the sensor and source domains are shown
on the far right of Fig. 4(c). A paired t-test was used to determine the statistical significance between the source- and sensorbased methods on the task accuracies and overall accuracy. As
indicated by Fig. 4(c), the source method proved to significantly
(p < 0.05) improve the accuracy of flexion (p = 0.007), supination (p = 0.038), and the total accuracy (p = 0.006). We also
tested the classification results against chance using a bootstrap
method by selecting random samples (n = 5) within the aforementioned confidence interval. The results of a paired t-test
revealed that all of the task accuracies and the overall accuracy in both domains were significantly different from chance
(p < 0.05).
B. Cortical Mapping
For all five subjects, there clearly emerged a single component
with the highest correlation with the motor task; the subsequent

ROIs localized to the left sensorimotor cortex and encompass the
hand knob of the precentral gyrus. The features that maximized
the overall classification were traced back to their location in
the corresponding spatial, temporal, and spectral domains to
observe signals responsible for separating each task.
Each one of the selected features corresponds to a particular
time window and frequency band of a single dipole’s time series
within the right-hand cortical ROI. The ranking procedure used
in selecting the time–frequency features utilizes the MD as an
indicator of separation between each one-versus-rest comparison (one task versus the other three). Therefore, not all features
will contribute equally; the increase of the MD upon adding a
new feature can be used to measure the influence of that feature
on separating the task in question from the other three. When
tracing features to their respective domain, each feature was
weighted by the percent increase of the MD that resulted when
that particular feature was added.
In the spatial domain, some dipoles may contain more than
one of the top features, while others may contain none of the
top features. Spatial source-based feature maps for each of
the four MI tasks in a representative subject are displayed in
Fig. 5(a). The increasing size of the sphere indicates the higher

EDELMAN et al.: ESI ENHANCES THE DECODING OF COMPLEX RIGHT-HAND MOTOR IMAGERY TASK

TABLE I
PAIRWISE R2 VALUES OF THE CORTICAL ROI SPATIAL FEATURE MAPS
BETWEEN ALL COMBINATIONS OF THE FOUR MI TASKS
Subject

F−E

F−S

F−P

E−S

E−P

S−P

1
2
3
4
5
Average

0.007
0.118
0.014
#
0.015
0.031

0.027
0.001
0.015
0.266
0.043
0.071

0.010
0.026
0.011
0.167
0.007
0.044

0.005
0.133
0.027
0.046
0.041
0.050

0.009
0.001
#
0.005
0.006
0.004

0.031
0.056
0.044
0.096
0.016
0.049

# denotes values less than 0.001. F—flexion, E—Extension, S—
Supination, P—Pronation

contribution of that particular dipole to the unique characteristics of the indicated task. We noticed that some dipoles were
very important (large sphere) for multiple tasks and, therefore,
attempted to map the ROI by finding, for each dipole, the best
represented MI task. In this sense, each dipole was assigned to
a single task with the strongest representation in the communal
space, as seen in Fig. 5(b). In Fig. 5(c), one of the four tasks was
superimposed on a rendered brain to highlight the distribution
in terms of an anatomical model.
To determine the spatial relationships between the four tasks’
cortical representations, we computed pairwise spatial correlations for all combinations of the four tasks. The R2 values
for all subjects are displayed in Table I. No consistent correlation patterns emerged across subjects, indicating that the spatial
distributions were quite distinct for each task.
Features were also traced back in the spectral and temporal domains such that the different frequency bands and time
windows containing the most discriminable information could
be identified. For each task, the spectral-temporal feature maps
can be represented as time–frequency distributions where the
darker time–frequency block indicates the higher contribution
to separating each task from the others (similar to the size of
the sphere in the spatial domain). Fig. 6 displays the group averaged time–frequency feature maps for each of the four MI
tasks. Histograms below and to the right of each TFR provide
a summary of the feature distribution in the respective domain.
Features can be seen to be distributed throughout the trials with
various peaks in the delta, alpha/mu, and beta bands.
IV. DISCUSSION
The integration of noninvasive BCIs into everyday use is
pushing the limit of our ability to interpret a user’s motor intent
solely through signals detected at the scalp [1], [11], [12]. SMR
BCIs in particular have been incorporated into many real-life
situations by controlling devices such as wheelchairs [45], limb
orthoses [46], or quadcopters [16]. The success of these systems is in large part due to the ability to exploit the underlying
neurophysiological processes of the primary sensorimotor cortex. The spatial location and time-varying behavior of rhythmic
components of EEG signals can often dissociate different activation patterns originating on the cortical surface; however, the
low spatial resolution of EEG limits the number of patterns that

11

can be separated. Therefore, SMR BCIs that are in fact able to
achieve successful higher dimensional control often utilize MI
tasks that are not associated with the output action that the user
is attempting to complete, and rather are used simply because
the tasks are easily separated. This study aimed to address this
concern by using ESI techniques to investigate the separability
of four MI tasks involving complex manipulations of the right
hand: flexion, extension, supination, and pronation. The results
indicate that ESI is able to greatly improve the classification of
these four tasks over traditional sensor techniques.
The basic principle of EEG inverse transforms are to project
the electrical values recorded on the scalp over a discrete geometrical representation of the brain [19], [47]. In this sense,
the information collected by the EEG can be constrained to
include information from anatomical structures that are more
correlated with the task being performed [22]–[28]. In order to
constrain the cortical activity, an ROI was derived from a single
component of the compiled MI task data. The component was
selected purely based on the highest time–frequency correlation
with an ideal MI task; for all subjects, the selected component
also displayed the following:
1) focal activity overlying the left (contralateral) motor cortex;
2) spectral-temporal behavior displaying ERD in the alpha/mu band at the onset of the task.
Our data-driven approach of identifying cortical ROIs containing distinct task information was consistent with previous
source localization results of finding brain regions responsible
for right-hand MI tasks [22], [48]. In finding these ROIs using
the compiled data from all four MI tasks, the selected ROI was
derived from the overlapping source activity of the right hand
rather than any single task. By doing so, bias toward any one of
the four MI tasks should, therefore, cancel out such that information from each task is equally represented within the ROI. We
can see from the mapping in Fig. 5(b) that no one task dominates
the ROI and that all tasks are well embodied within the righthand space. The centroids of the spatial networks also localize
to similar sites on or near the precentral gyrus [see Fig. 5(d)] for
all five subjects. These two observations indicate that none of
the tasks were underrepresented or had a spatial preference, but
rather that the data-driven ROI identification evenly captured
discriminable information from each task.
The classification of the four tasks displayed a global increase
of 12.7% in the source domain compared to the sensor domain
[see Fig. 4(a)]. This enhancement is nearly double that (7.1%)
which was found in our previous work on separating left- and
right-hand MI tasks using source analysis [26]. However, the
previous study involved only a binary classification, whereas in
this study, four tasks are being separated [26]; with the increased
number of tasks, this improvement is even more substantial.
Among the tasks in question, flexion saw the greatest single
task improvement (18.6%), while the smallest improvement was
seen in extension (6.6%). We believe this phenomenon partially
stems from the user’s ability to perform the different MI tasks;
when asked about the difficulty in performing each task, subjects
often reported that flexion felt the most natural and was the

12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Group averaged feature mapping in the time and frequency domains. Histograms below and to the right of the time–frequency plots sum the features in
each domain to show the importance of each time window and frequency band for discriminating each task from the other three. The darker the blocks in the plots
indicate higher importance for the specified task.

easiest to visualize mentally. On the other hand, either supination
or extension was reported to be the most unnatural MI task to
perform.
Furthermore, the results were not biased by pairing flexion
and extension, and supination and pronation MI tasks together
within a single run. Transient nonstationarities in the EEG are
likely to cluster within a single run, rather than be spread across
multiple runs or days. The resulting prejudice would likely
cause the most common misclassifications to be between the
tasks within each pairing; however, we did not observe any
such trend. Rather, we observed higher misclassification rates
between tasks that were most similar in terms of the physical
action; flexion (bend inward) and pronation (twist inward), and
extension (bend outward) and supination (twist outward). We
also noticed that this phenomenon occurred primarily in the
source domain. For example, in the source confusion matrix in
Fig. 4(b), the flexion task’s most prevalent false negative was
pronation, as was supination for the extension task and flexion for the pronation task. In the sensor confusion matrix, this
effect is only observed by flexion most commonly misclassified as pronation. This trend supports the idea that even though
subjects were not actually executing the motion, the signals generated from imagining the movement were still representative
of the different tasks. Furthermore, the higher spatial resolution
achieved through ESI techniques may help to illuminate the
subtle differences in these signals [49].
Penfield’s classical definition of somatotopy within the primary motor cortex dedicated independent cortical regions to
the control of single muscles or body parts. However, it has
since been observed in humans using electrocorticography [50],
[51] and functional MRI [52]–[54] recordings that there is clear
overlap in the activation of neural circuits both during tasks of

different limbs and of the same limb, most notably the hand.
The cause of this overlap is thought to stem from horizontal
connections within the hand region of the cortex where different populations of cells are responsible for moving some parts
of the hand while withholding the movement of others [55].
The result is a distributed activation pattern that dynamically
changes based on the type of action being performed and the
involvement of the different muscles and joints. These results
have led to the development of a modern theory of hierarchical
encoding of M1 where individual cells encode for combined
muscle movements, with a map of functional tasks overlaid on
top of the dynamic topographical boundaries [56], [57].
In tracing features responsible for separating each task to
their respective cortical locations [see Fig. 5(a)], we were able
to observe overlapping and yet distinct distributed networks
among the dipoles in the right-hand ROI that support a functional somatotopic representation of M1. The results from Table I describing the spatial correlations between the different
tasks display no consistent similarities across tasks or subjects
and suggest unique task-based interactions between the different
dipoles in the ROI. Nevertheless, the current density reconstruction resulting from ESI techniques is not a true restoration of
neuronal behavior, but rather an estimation of the current density at discrete points in brain space. However, by increasing
the sampling density of the data and incorporating additional
anatomical information through ESI, we were able to emulate
dipole interactions that may be more similar to the underlying
neurophysiology than can be achieved in the sensor domain.
By doing so, representative activity of smaller neuronal populations (compared to sensor analysis) within the right-hand
ROI was able to increase the separability of different MI tasks
originating in the same region.

EDELMAN et al.: ESI ENHANCES THE DECODING OF COMPLEX RIGHT-HAND MOTOR IMAGERY TASK

When examining the features in the time domain (see Fig. 6),
there appeared to be a fairly even distribution across the entire trial. This indicates that discriminable information can be
detected from continuously performing the tasks rather than
at a specific time point/windows relative to the task onset.
When examining the frequency histograms, we found that there
were often peaks in the delta and alpha/mu bands and multiple
peaks in the beta band. A wide range of frequency bands have
been attributed to distinct traces of motor intention. Studies by
Vučković and Sepulveda [58], [59] examined MI tasks similar to the present study and found that the delta band carried
the most class-specific information. Activity in the alpha/mu,
beta, and gamma (>35 Hz) bands has also been shown to carry
discriminable information relevant to these types of tasks [59]–
[62]. Pairwise binary classification schemes are often used in
these studies to achieve accuracies as high as >80% making
results difficult to compare to the present study; however, the
current work achieved similar accuracies (82.2%) using twice as
many classes demonstrating much increased performance with
the proposed ESI approach.
The current results were based on using the combination of information from multiple-frequency bands and we cannot draw
concrete conclusions as to which frequency band contributed
most to the discrimination of the four tasks. Further analysis using information from each frequency band independently [63]–
[65] would be needed to determine which frequencies contain
the most discriminable information regarding these tasks.
In all, the defining spatial, temporal, and spectral characteristics of the MI tasks exposed in this study are consistent
with documented neurophysiological evidence using other neuroimaging modalities. The overlapping band-specific oscillatory
activity in the shared cortical region allowed us to successfully
separate MI tasks involving complex manipulations of the right
hand.
V. CONCLUSION
Introduction of complex MI tasks of the same limb into SMR
BCIs can drive these systems toward user-centered applications
in which specific jobs can be integrated depending on the user’s
personal needs. It is unrealistic to construct a noninvasive SMR
BCI to accomplish tasks involving all the degrees of freedom of
the human hand; however, in reality, users of these systems will
need only a limited number of tasks to increase their autonomy.
These tasks will need to be easy for the users to perform, and
as such, an intuitive connection between the MI tasks used to
accomplish an action is imperative. The present study aimed to
determine if complex tasks of the hand could be separated for
this exact purpose. Most everyday tasks such as picking up a
cup or turning ON and OFF a light switch involve fine motor
control of the hand; therefore, we investigated MI tasks that
imitated complex manipulations of the hand that may be of use
for accomplishing these tasks.
In conclusion, this study for the first time reports the application of ESI techniques to separating multiple MI tasks of the
same hand. The results indicate that MI tasks involving different orientations of the right hand can be classified with high

13

accuracy and can be enhanced through ESI techniques. The successful integration of these tasks into a source-analysis-based
BCI may help subjects for the self-modulation of brain states
associated with actions that can be useful on a day-to-day basis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to C. Zhang and L. Yu for helpful
discussions and to T. Hanson for aiding in data collection.
REFERENCES
[1] B. He et al., “Brain-computer interface,” in Neural Engineering, 2nd ed.,
B. He, Ed. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 2013, pp. 87–151.
[2] J. L. Collinger et al., “High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an
individual with tetraplegia,” Lancet, vol. 381, pp. 557–564, Feb. 2013.
[3] L. R. Hochberg et al., “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using
a neurally controlled robotic arm,” Nature, vol. 485, pp. 372–375, May
2012.
[4] E. Donchin et al., “The mental prosthesis: Assessing the speed of a P300based brain-computer interface,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 174–179, Jun. 2000.
[5] C.-C. Postelnicu and D. Talaba, “P300-based brain-neuronal computer
interaction for spelling applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 2, pp. 534–543, Feb. 2013.
[6] Y. Li et al., “A hybrid BCI system combining P300 and SSVEP and its
application to wheelchair control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 11, pp. 3156–3166, Nov. 2013.
[7] Y. Kimura et al., “SSVEP-based brain-computer interfaces using FSKmodulated visual stimuli,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 10,
pp. 2831–2838, Oct. 2013.
[8] S. Gao et al., “Visual and auditory brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1436–1447, May 2014.
[9] E. Yin et al., “A speedy hybrid BCI spelling approach combining P300
and SSVEP,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 473–483, Feb.
2014.
[10] R. Xu et al., “Enhanced low-latency detection of motor intention from
EEG for closed-loop brain-computer interface applications.,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 288–296, Feb. 2014.
[11] H. Yuan and B. He, “Brain-computer interfaces using sensorimotor
rhythms: Current state and future perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1425–1435, May 2014.
[12] B. He et al., “Noninvasive brain-computer interfaces based on sensorimotor rhythms,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 907–295, Jun. 2015.
[13] J. R. Wolpaw and D. J. McFarland, “Control of a two-dimensional movement signal by a noninvasive brain-computer interface in humans,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 101, no. 51, pp. 17849–17854, Dec. 2004.
[14] A. Royer et al., “EEG control of a virtual helicopter in 3-dimensional space
using intelligent control strategies,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 581–589, Dec. 2010.
[15] A. J. Doud et al., “Continuous three-dimensional control of a virtual
helicopter using a motor imagery based brain-computer interface,” PLoS
One, vol. 6, no. 10, p. e26322, Jan. 2011.
[16] K. LaFleur et al., “Quadcopter control in three-dimensional space using
a noninvasive motor imagery-based brain-computer interface,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, p. 046003, Aug. 2013.
[17] G. Pfurtscheller and L. D. Silva, “Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization: Basic principles,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol.
110, no. 11, pp. 1842–1857, 1999.
[18] K. Cassady et al., “The impact of mind-body awareness training on the
early learning of a brain-computer interface,” Technology, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 254–260, Mar. 2014.
[19] B. He and L. Ding, “Electrophysiological neuroimaging,” in Neural
Engineering, 2nd ed., B. He, Ed. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 2013,
pp. 499–543.
[20] D. Wang et al., “Multi-class motor imagery EEG decoding for braincomputer interfaces,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 6, p. 151, Jan. 2012.
[21] A. Schlögl et al., “Characterization of four-class motor imagery EEG data
for the BCI-competition 2005,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. L14–L22,
Dec. 2005.
[22] H. Yuan et al., “Cortical imaging of event-related (de) synchronization
during online control of brain-computer interface using minimum-norm

14

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

estimates in frequency domain,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 425–431, Oct. 2008.
H. Yuan et al., “Negative covariation between task-related responses in
alpha/beta-band activity and BOLD in human sensorimotor cortex: An
EEG and fMRI study of motor imagery and movements,” Neuroimage,
vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 2596–2606, Feb. 2010.
L. Qin et al., “Motor imagery classification by means of source analysis
for brain-computer interface applications,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 1, no. 3,
pp. 135–141, Sep. 2004.
B. Kamousi et al., “Classification of motor imagery tasks for braincomputer interface applications by means of two equivalent dipoles analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 166–171,
Jun. 2005.
B. Kamousi et al., “Classification of motor imagery by means of cortical
current density estimation and Von Neumann entropy,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 17–25, Jun. 2007.
M. Mattiocco et al., “Neuroelectrical source imaging of mu rhythm control
for BCI applications,” in Proc. 28th Annu. Int. IEEE EMBS Conf., 2006,
vol. 1, pp. 980–983.
F. Cincotti et al., “High-resolution EEG techniques for brain-computer
interface applications,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 167, no. 1, pp. 31–42,
Jan. 2008.
A. N. Tikhonov and V. Y. Arsenin, “Solutions of ill-posed problems,” Am.
Math. Soc., vol. 32, no. 144, pp. 1320–1322, 1977.
R. D. Pascual-Marqui et al., “Low resolution electromagnetic tomography: A new method for localizing electrical activity in the brain,” Int. J.
Psychophysiol., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 49–65, Oct. 1994.
C. J. Holmes et al., “Enhancement of MR images using registration for
signal averaging,” J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 324–333,
1998.
B. He et al., “Electric dipole tracing in the brain by means of the boundary
element method and its accuracy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME34, no. 6, pp. 406–414, Jun. 1987.
M. S. Hämäläinen and J. Sarvas, “Realistic conductivity geometry model
of the human head for interpretation of neuromagnetic data,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 165–171, Feb. 1989.
T. F. Oostendorp et al., “The conductivity of the human skull: Results of
in vivo and in vitro measurements,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47,
no. 11, pp. 1487–1492, Nov. 2000.
Y. Zhang et al., “Estimation of in vivo brain-to-skull conductivity ratio in
humans,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 89, p. 223903, 2006.
Y. Lai et al., “Estimation of in vivo human brain-to-skull conductivity ratio
from simultaneous extra- and intra-cranial electrical potential recordings,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 116, pp. 456–465, 2005.
D. Mattia et al., “Motor-related cortical dynamics to intact movements
in tetraplegics as revealed by high-resolution EEG,” Hum. Brain Mapp.,
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 510–519, Jun. 2006.
B. Edelman et al., “Decoding and mapping of right hand motor imagery
tasks using EEG source imaging,” in Proc. 7th Annu. Int. IEEE EMBS
Neural Eng. Conf., 2015, pp. 194–197.
J. Cardoso, “Infomax and maximum likelihood for blind source separation,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 112–114, Apr. 1997.
G. Pfurtscheller et al., “Mu rhythm (de)synchronization and EEG singletrial classification of different motor imagery tasks,” Neuroimage, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 153–159, May 2006.
G. Pfurtscheller et al., “EEG-based discrimination between imagination of
right and left hand movement,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 642–651, Dec. 1997.
F. Tadel et al., “Brainstorm: A user-friendly application for MEG/EEG
analysis,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2011, p. 879716, Jan. 2011.
B. Edelman et al., “Discriminating hand gesture motor imagery tasks
using cortical current density estimation,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Int. IEEE
EMBS Conf., 2014, pp. 1314–1317.
G. R. Müller-Putz et al., “Better than random? A closer look on BCI
results,” Int. J. Bioelectromagn., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 52–55, 2008.

[45] R. Leeb et al., “Self-paced (asynchronous) BCI control of a wheelchair
in virtual environments: A case study with a tetraplegic,” Comput. Intell.
Neurosci., vol. 2007, p. 79642, Jan. 2007.
[46] G. Pfurtscheller et al., “Brain oscillations control hand orthosis in a
tetraplegic,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 292, no. 3, pp. 211–214, Oct. 2000.
[47] B. He et al., “Electrophysiological imaging of brain activity and
connectivity-challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1918–1931, Jul. 2011.
[48] W. Wang et al., “Decoding and cortical source localization for intended movement direction with MEG,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 104, no. 5,
pp. 2451–2461, Nov. 2010.
[49] B. He et al., “Grand challenges in mapping the human brain: NSF workshop report,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 2983–2992,
Nov. 2013.
[50] J. Kubánek et al., “Decoding flexion of individual fingers using electrocorticographic signals in humans,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, no. 6, p. 066001,
Dec. 2009.
[51] T. Pistohl et al., “Decoding natural grasp types from human ECoG,”
Neuroimage, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 248–260, Jan. 2012.
[52] J. Sanes et al., “Shared neural substrates controlling hand movements
in human motor cortex,” Science, vol. 268, no. 5218, pp. 1775–1777,
1995.
[53] J. D. Meier et al., “Complex organization of human primary motor cortex: A high-resolution fMRI study,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 100, no. 4,
pp. 1800–1812, Oct. 2008.
[54] P. Hlustı́k et al., “Somatotopy in human primary motor and somatosensory
hand representations revisited,” Cereb. Cortex, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 312–321,
Apr. 2001.
[55] M. H. Schieber and L. S. Hibbard, “How somatotopic is the motor cortex
hand area?,” Science, vol. 261, no. 5120, pp. 489–492, 1993.
[56] M. Flanders, “Functional somatotopy in sensorimotor cortex,” Neuroreport, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 313–316, Mar. 2005.
[57] R. N. Holdefer and L. E. Miller, “Primary motor cortical neurons encode functional muscle synergies,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 146, no. 2,
pp. 233–243, Sep. 2002.
[58] A. Vučković and F. Sepulveda, “Delta band contribution in cue based
single trial classification of real and imaginary wrist movements,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 529–539, Jun. 2008.
[59] A. Vučković and F. Sepulveda, “A two-stage four-class BCI based on
imaginary movements of the left and the right wrist,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 964–971, Sep. 2012.
[60] E. López-Larraz et al., “Continuous decoding of movement intention of
upper limb self-initiated analytic movements from pre-movement EEG
correlates,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 11, p. 153, Jan. 2014.
[61] Y. Gu et al., “Single-trial discrimination of type and speed of wrist
movements from EEG recordings,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120, no. 8,
pp. 1596–600, Aug. 2009.
[62] Y. U. Khan and F. Sepulveda, “Brain–computer interface for single-trial
EEG classification for wrist movement imagery using spatial filtering in
the gamma band,” IET Signal Process., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 510–517, 2010.
[63] S. Waldert et al., “Hand movement direction decoded from MEG and
EEG,” J. Neurosci., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1000–1008, 2008.
[64] T. J. Bradberry et al., “Reconstructing three-dimensional hand movements
from noninvasive electroencephalographic signals,” J. Neurosci., vol. 30,
no. 9, pp. 3432–3437, Mar. 2010.
[65] T. M. Hall et al., “A common structure underlies low-frequency cortical
dynamics in movement, sleep, and sedation,” Neuron, vol. 83, no. 5,
pp. 1185–1199, Sep. 2014.

Authors’ photographs and bioraphies not available at the time of publication.

