IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

1829

Validity and Responsiveness of At-Home Touch
Screen Assessments in Advanced Parkinson’s Disease
Mevludin Memedi, Dag Nyholm, Anders Johansson, Sven Pålhagen, Thomas Willows, Håkan Widner,
Jan Linder, and Jerker Westin

Abstract—The aim of this study was to investigate if a telemetry
test battery can be used to measure effects of Parkinson’s disease
(PD) treatment intervention and disease progression in patients
with fluctuations. Sixty-five patients diagnosed with advanced PD
were recruited in an open longitudinal 36-month study; 35 treated
with levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG) and 30 were candidates for switching from oral PD treatment to LCIG. They utilized
a test battery, consisting of self-assessments of symptoms and fine
motor tests (tapping and spiral drawings), four times per day in
their homes during week-long test periods. The repeated measurements were summarized into an overall test score (OTS) to represent the global condition of the patient during a test period. Clinical
assessments included ratings on unified PD rating scale (UPDRS)
and 39-item PD questionnaire (PDQ-39) scales. In LCIG-naı̈ve
patients, the mean OTS compared to baseline was significantly improved from the first test period on LCIG treatment until month
24. In LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients, there were no significant changes
in the mean OTS until month 36. The OTS correlated adequately
with total UPDRS (rho = 0.59) and total PDQ-39 (0.59). Responsiveness measured as effect size was 0.696 and 0.536 for OTS and
UPDRS, respectively. The trends of the test scores were similar to
the trends of clinical rating scores but the dropout rate was high.
Correlations between OTS and clinical rating scales were adequate
indicating that the test battery contains important elements of the
information of well-established scales. The responsiveness and reproducibility were better for OTS than for total UPDRS.
Index Terms—Home assessment, levodopa infusion, Parkinson’s
disease (PD), remote monitoring, telemedicine.

I. INTRODUCTION
EASURING symptoms- and treatment-related changes
in advanced Parkinson’s disease (PD) with motor fluctuations is challenging. The current state of the art in clinical
trials is to use the unified PD rating scale (UPDRS), different

M

Manuscript received April 2, 2015; revised July 12, 2015; accepted August 7,
2015. Date of publication August 13, 2015; date of current version November
3, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Swedish Knowledge Foundation, Abbot Product Operations AG, Allschwil, Switzerland, and Nordforce
Technology AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
M. Memedi and J. Westin are with the School of Technology and Business
Studies, Computer Engineering, Dalarna University, Falun 791 88, Sweden
(e-mail: mmi@du.se; jwe@du.se).
D. Nyholm is with the Department of Neuroscience, Neurology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala 751 85, Sweden (e-mail: dag.nyholm@neuro.uu.se).
A. Johansson is with the Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Neurology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 14186, Sweden (e-mail: anders.c.
johansson@karolinska.se).
S. Pålhagen and T. Willows are with the Department of Neurology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 171 77, Sweden (e-mail: sven.palhagen@
karolinska.se; thomas.willows@karolinska.se).
H. Widner is with the Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital,
Lund 221 85, Sweden (e-mail: hakan.widner@med.lu.se).
J. Linder is with the Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Neuroscience,
Umeå University, Umeå 901 87, Sweden (e-mail: jan.linder@neuro.umu.se).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2468088

scales rating health-related quality of life such as the 39-item
PD Questionnaire (PDQ-39), and patient diaries recording time
in off, in on and in on with dyskinesia. However, scales used
to rate fluctuations can on an individual level be unreliable, because when they are asked the patients do not exactly remember
how their condition has been. Patient diaries capture fluctuations
better, but even these are often not filled out at the correct time
[1]. Frequent, time-stamped data capture is necessary to get reliable data and to prevent recall bias [2], and patients’ subjective
ratings may not correlate to measurements of improvement [3].
This suggests that combining elements of common rating scales
with frequent subjective and objective, observer-independent
tests before and after a treatment intervention will cover more
aspects of outcome than what can be achieved by the established
scales alone. In contrast to the standard clinical approaches for
assessment and follow-up of PD symptoms, telemedicine methods provide means for remote, long-term, and repeated assessments of symptoms and their fluctuations potentially improving
the accessibility and efficiency of care and increasing the patient
compliance [4]. These methods can be based on data gathered by
wearable sensors [5] [6] and smartphone technology [7]. However, these methods have not yet to any greater extent found
their way to routine clinical settings.
A new real-time electronic patient diary with motor tests for
telemetering and accurately capturing symptom fluctuations,
aimed at providing valid data during fluctuations was evaluated. This test battery consists of repeated measurements of
self-assessments of common PD symptoms and objective measures of the motor function (tapping and spiral drawing), for
use in patients’ home environments. The tests were applied as
secondary outcome measures in a prospective 36-month study
of levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG) in patients with
advanced PD [8].
The present analysis was performed with the following objectives: 1) to determine if PD progression over time can be
followed in results of the test battery, 2) to assess sensitivity of
the test results in relation to treatment intervention, 3) to assess
the relative ability of the test scores and clinical rating scores to
detect change, 4) to assess their correlations, and 5) to estimate
reproducibility.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Patients
Seventy-seven patients with advanced PD were recruited in
an open-longitudinal 36-month study at ten hospitals in Sweden and Norway from January 2006 to August 2010 [8]. On

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1830

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

TABLE I
CLINICAL FEATURES AT BASELINE

Patients (n, gender)
Age (years)
Years with levodopa
Years with LCIG
Hoehn and Yahr stage
Total UPDRS

LCIG-NAÏVE

LCIG-nonnaı̈ve

Combined

37 (23m; 14f)

40 (27m; 13f)

77 (50m; 27f)

63 ± 10
10 ± 5

65.5 ± 10
15 ± 8.25
1.96 ± 1.84
2.75 ± 2
48 ± 17.5

65 ± 11
13 ± 7

2.5 ± 1
47 ± 18

2.5 ± 1
48 ± 19

Data presented as median ± interquartile range. Abbreviations: m; male,
f; female.

inclusion, 40 of them were treated with LCIG (Duodopa, AbbVie) and 37 patients were candidates for switching from conventional oral PD treatment to LCIG [9]. In the latter group, patients
were LCIG treatment-naı̈ve at study start. The LCIG dose was
adjusted to obtain optimal clinical response for the individual
subject by maximizing their functional on time during the day,
minimizing their number of off episodes and bradykinesia, and
minimizing on time with dyskinesia [8]. Written informed consent was given and the regional ethical review board (in Stockholm, Sweden), after reviewing the study protocol, determined
that their approval was not required. Patient characteristics at
the baseline are shown in Table I.
B. Telemetry System
Patients performed repeated, time-stamped, and remote assessments of their subjective and objective health indicators
using a wireless telemetry test battery implemented on a touch
screen handheld device [10]. The test battery consisted of a
patient diary section for collecting self-assessments of common
PD symptoms, a motor test section for collecting objective measures of the motor function through a set of upper limb motor
tests, and a scheduler for restricting the operation to a multitude
of predetermined limited time slots. The overall system was
implemented in a client–server architecture for collecting and
wirelessly transmitting the remote data to a central server for
storage and offline processing. On each test occasion, the data
are transmitted from the handheld device over a universal mobile
telecommunication system to the server where so-called remote
device manager (RDM, Nordforce Technology AB) software
is executed. RDM is a commercial software platform aimed to
provide a high availability data communication link with a very
high security level over wireless Internet. Once the data are received at the server side, those are initially stored as separate
extensible markup language files which in turn are interpreted
by a custom-designed software in .NET. This software parses,
processes, and stores both the raw and summarized data into
relational database tables. The test battery was implemented on
a Qtek 2020i Pocket PC device having a screen size of 60 mm
× 80 mm.
C. Telemetry Assessments
Both the LCIG-naı̈ve and LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients used the
test battery four times per day during week-long test periods
over the course of the study. In order to enable a reliable assess-

ment during fluctuations, the sample size was determined based
on a target variance of an e-diary, as previously reported in the
study performed by Nyholm et al. [2]. On each test occasion,
patients were instructed to place the device on a table, be seated
in a chair and use an ergonomic stylus to perform the tests. The
LCIG-naı̈ve patients used the test battery at baseline (before
LCIG), month 0 (first visit; at least three months after permanent intraduodenal LCIG), and thereafter quarterly for the first
year and biannually for the second and third years. The LCIGnonnaı̈ve patients used the test battery from the first visit, i.e.,
month 0.
Twelve of the 77 patients did not use the test battery because
seven of them were not Swedish-speaking and five were unwilling to use the device or were thought unable to handle it.
Out of the remaining 65 patients, 35 were LCIG-nonnaı̈ve and
30 LCIG-naı̈ve. Twenty-seven out of the 37 initially included
LCIG-naı̈ve patients started LCIG treatment during the study. In
20 LCIG-naı̈ve patients, assessments with the test battery were
available during oral treatment and at least one test period after
having started infusion treatment. Three LCIG-naı̈ve patients
did not use the test battery at baseline but had at least one test
period of assessments thereafter. Hence, n = 23 in the LCIGnaı̈ve group. In total, symptom assessments in the full sample
(including both LCIG-naı̈ve and nonnaı̈ve patients) were collected during 379 test periods and 10079 test occasions.
A more detailed description of the test battery and its included
items can be found elsewhere [10], however an outline is provided here. On each test occasion, patients were first asked to
answer the PD-related questions and then to perform the motor
tests. There were seven self-assessment questions (q) relating
to the previous four hours or this morning, including “ability to
walk” (q1), “proportion of time spent in off, on, and dyskinetic”
(q2), “off at worst” (q3), “dyskinetic at worst” (q4), “painful
cramps” (q5), “satisfied with functioning” (q6), and “momentary motor condition from −3 (very off) to +3 (very dyskinetic)”
(q7). The questions were selected based on two previously published e-diaries [2], [11]. The motor tests included different
tapping tests and tracing a predrawn Archimedean spiral. The
tapping tests consisted of four tests, including “alternate tapping
using right hand” (q8), “alternate tapping using left hand” (q9),
“tapping with increasing speed using dominant hand” (q10), and
“tapping with random chasing using dominant hand” (q11). Patients were asked to perform tapping of square areas (“fields”)
as shown on the screen of the device. The fields had a side of approximately 15 mm and at least one button was active. All fields
became inactive after 20 s after the first field was pressed. For
the spiral drawing test, patients traced a predrawn Archimedean
spiral using the dominant hand, and the test was repeated three
times per test occasion (q12-q14). An overview of the raw data
items is illustrated by Fig. 3. Motor test designs were inspired
by other tests and test batteries such as those described by Giovannoni et al. [12], Taylor Tavares et al. [13], Williams et al.
[14], and Liu et al. [15]. Tests were performed once during
four fixed time slots each day during test periods of one week.
Data entry was blocked except during the four daily time slots
of one hour’s length: 08:00–09:00, 12:00–13:00, 16:00–17:00,
and 20:00–21:00.

MEMEDI et al.: VALIDITY AND RESPONSIVENESS OF AT-HOME TOUCH SCREEN ASSESSMENTS IN ADVANCED PARKINSON’S DISEASE

D. Clinical Assessments
The clinical evaluation included the UPDRS and PDQ-39
scales, performed in afternoons at the start of each test period
[8]. LCIG-naı̈ve patients were evaluated at baseline and followup test periods, whereas LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients were evaluated
starting from month 0. In total, clinical assessments were done
during 369 test periods.
E. Data Processing
Tapping variables of the mean speed (number of taps per
20 s) and accuracy (percentage of correct taps) were calculated and used in subsequent analysis. The spiral drawings were
processed by a method including wavelet transforms which generated a “spiral score” representing PD-related drawing impairments [16]. The scorings provided by this method resulted in
strong correlations with averaged scorings of two trained neurologists. A “mean spiral score” (MSS) was defined as the mean
of the three spiral scores per test occasion.
The week-long time series of the test battery items were
processed and summarized into scores representing patients’
symptom severities over a test period, using machine learning
and statistical methods [17]. Initially, the time series were summarized into statistical features for representing symptom levels
and variations followed by using them in data-driven modeling
for deriving six conceptual symptom dimensions and an “overall test score” (OTS). There were four subjectively reported
dimensions including “walking” (based on q1), “satisfied” (q6),
“dyskinesia” (q2- dyskinetic and q4), and “off” (q2-off and q3)
and two objectively measured including “tapping” (based on
speed and accuracy of q8–q11) and “spiral” (MSS of q12–q14).
The OTS was defined to represent the global health condition of
the patient during a test period by combining the subjective and
objective measures into a composite score, with the aim of providing similar information content as the total UPDRS. The OTS
was defined as a linear combination of the first principal components of the six dimensions and their respective coefficients,
estimated by the least-squares multiple linear regression model
with total UPDRS as a dependent variable. The model was built
using a stratified tenfold cross-validation approach by repeating
the whole process, training, and testing, ten times with different random samples. The ranges of the OTS and dimensions
were scaled from 0 to 1, where 0 represents bad function and
1 good function. After linear regression, the objectively measured dimensions (tapping and spiral) were assigned a higher
weight (65%) than subjectively reported dimensions (walking,
satisfied, off, and dyskinesia), similarly as the motor section of
the UPDRS scale has the highest weight in the total UPDRS.
F. Statistical Methods
Change in the test battery scores over time, that is at
baseline and follow-up test periods, was assessed with linear
mixed-models [18] using a restricted maximum likelihood estimation method with patient ID as a random effect and test period
as a fixed effect of interest. The dependent variables were the test
battery scores; the raw test battery items, OTS, and dimensions.
To assess the reproducibility of OTS and total UPDRS scores,

1831

correlation coefficients between their scores during “month 3”
and “month 6” test periods were calculated. The difference in
time between these test periods was 3 months, which is short
enough to not be much influenced by disease progression. The
LCIG treatment had at this point been used for at least some
months in all subjects so treatment settings were in general
kept stable. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to assess
the difference in the median percentage absolute error (month
6–month 3) for OTS and total UPDRS. The relative ability to
detect change from baseline (oral treatment) to month 0 (LCIG)
of total UPDRS and OTS was determined by the effect size
correlation (r), representing the magnitude of treatment effect,
c.f., e.g., [19]. The r was calculated as the square root of the
squared t-test value divided by the sum 
of squares of t-test value
plus the degrees of freedom, using r = (t2 /(t2 + df )), where
t (t-test value) and df (degrees of freedom) were extracted from
LME models applied on data consisting of tests collected during baseline and month 0 test periods. The scale which had the
highest r value was defined as the most sensitive to treatment
response. Correlations between OTS, dimensions, and clinical
rating scores were assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficients (rho). Statistical analyses were carried out using the
statistical software R.
III. RESULTS
The mean OTS scores at the baseline were 0.47 and 0.51
for LCIG-naı̈ve and LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients, respectively (see
Fig. 1). In LCIG-naı̈ve patients, the mean OTS improved to
the first test period on LCIG treatment and this improvement
remained statistically significant until month 24. The patient
number decreased successively during the study (see legend to
Fig. 1).
The maximum improvement, 0.15 units (32%) higher than at
the baseline (p < 0.001), was seen at month 3. Mean dimension
scores of LCIG-naı̈ve patients from baseline to the 36-month
follow-up are shown in Fig. 2. The mean scores of all subjectively reported dimensions improved significantly throughout
the course of the study, except “walking” at month 36 (p = 0.41,
n = 4). However, there were no significant differences in mean
scores of objectively measured dimensions between baseline
and other test periods, except improved “tapping” at months 6
and 36, and “spirals” at month 3 (p < 0.05).
There were no significant changes in mean OTS scores, dimensions, or raw question items in LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients
over the course of the study, except for worse mean OTS at
month 36 (p < 0.01, n = 16) (see Fig. 1). Reasonably, similar
trends were observed in mean scores of raw motor items between LCIG-naı̈ve and LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients. Correlations
between months 3 and 6 were stronger for OTS (0.91) than
for total UPDRS (0.79). The median percentage absolute error
was 10.5 for OTS and 19.7 for total UPDRS, and the difference
between the two errors was significant (p = 0.034).
Fig. 3 shows mean scores of the raw test battery items of
LCIG-naı̈ve patients. The mean scores of raw question items
(q1–q6) improved significantly, except for q5 (perceived painful
cramps) at month 24 (p = 0.18). All changes were seen at the
first LCIG period and were sustained over the study period. In

1832

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

30. However, tapping accuracy was not improved by LCIG and
deteriorated during alternate tapping (q8–q9) and random chasing (q11), but accuracy improved during tapping with a systemgenerated increasing speed (q10). The largest deteriorations in
tapping accuracy were observed at month 36. The trend of spiral scores indicates that drawing performance of patients started
worsening from month 6. Investigating mean scores of raw test
battery items, OTS, and dimensions of LCIG-non-naı̈ve patients
asserted that there were generally no prompt changes as in the
case of the LCIG-naı̈ve patients.
The r values (effect sizes) for the OTS and total UPDRS were
0.696 and 0.536, respectively, indicating that OTS has a greater
effect size than total UPDRS.
The Spearman’s rhos (absolute values) between OTS and
clinical ratings in the full sample were as follows: total UPDRS
(rho = 0.59), total PDQ-39 (rho = 0.59), and UPDRS II (rho
= 0.64) and UPDRS III (rho = 0.48). The rho between total
UPDRS and total PDQ-39 was 0.52. Among subjectively reported dimensions, “Dyskinesia” had the strongest correlation
to both total UPDRS and UPDRS III with rhos of 0.41 and 0.29,
respectively. “Walking” had the strongest correlations to total
PDQ-39 (rho = 0.49) and to UPDRS II (rho = 0.45). Among
objectively measured dimensions, “Tapping” had the strongest
correlations: total UPDRS (rho = 0.53), total PDQ-39 (rho =
0.52), and UPDRS II (rho = 0.58) and UPDRS III (rho = 0.43).

Fig. 1. Trends of mean OTS (solid line) and total UPDRS (dashed line)
scores of LCIG-naı̈ve and nonnaı̈ve patients over the study duration. Y-axes: a
high score means good function. Note that the total UPDRS axis is reversed.
Significant mean differences are shown with respect to initial test periods,
month-3 (before LCIG, upper graph) and month 0 (lower graph). ∗ = p < 0.05,
∗∗ = p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ = p < 0.001. Abbreviation: n.s., not significant.

Fig. 2. Trends of mean dimension scores of LCIG-naı̈ve patients over the
study period. A high score represents good function. Significance in mean
differences are shown with respect to baseline before LCIG (−3). ∗ = p < 0.05,
∗∗ = p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ = p < 0.001. Abbreviation: n.s., not significant. Number
of observations in all graphs are the same as in Fig. 1, upper graph, OTS.

general, patients at the baseline had a tendency to self-rate their
momentary motor conditions (q7) as being “slightly off” with a
mean score of −0.32 on a −3 to +3 scale. This question showed
little and insignificant changes over time.
Tapping speeds improved starting from the first test period on
LCIG treatment and the change remained significant to month

IV. DISCUSSION
Validated methods to remotely and objectively assess outcomes in subjects with PD over time are needed. Relevant
approaches to remote monitoring of PD symptoms include ediaries [20], wearable inertia sensor systems (e.g., [5] and [6]),
various testing tools (e.g., [4]), and video-based monitoring systems (e.g., [21]). The objective methods for quantifying the motor function can potentially complement and enhance the physician and patient perspectives. There has however been a lack
of mechanisms that combine these different types of remote information into scores to provide a more holistic presentation of
patients’ general health, their symptom fluctuations, and treatment effects. Our study relates to a relatively large number of
patients distributed among multiple clinics, reporting during
a relatively long time. The main finding of this study is that
using this technology it is possible to monitor PD symptoms
remotely. Correlations between OTS and clinical rating scales
(UPDRS and PDQ-39) were adequate indicating that the test
battery contains important elements of the information of these
well-established scales. The trends of the test battery scores over
time were similar to the trends of conventional clinical rating
scores throughout the study (see Fig. 1).
The clinimetric properties (reliability and validity criteria) of
OTS and dimensions have been previously evaluated in a separate study with PD patients in different stages [22]. In that study,
the internal consistency of symptom dimensions was good, there
was adequate test–retest reliability, and OTS median score was
different between advanced patients, experiencing on–off fluctuations and less severe, clinically stable patients having an early
stage of the disease. These results are now confirmed by the
present analysis and it is demonstrated that OTS can have better

MEMEDI et al.: VALIDITY AND RESPONSIVENESS OF AT-HOME TOUCH SCREEN ASSESSMENTS IN ADVANCED PARKINSON’S DISEASE

1833

Fig. 3. Trends of mean scores of raw test battery items of LCIG-naı̈ve patients over time. “Ability to walk” (q1), “proportion of time spent in off, on, and
dyskinetic” (q2), “off at worst” (q3), “dyskinetic at worst” (q4), “painful cramps” (q5), “satisfied with functioning” (q6), and “momentary motor condition from
–3 (very off) to +3 (very dyskinetic)” (q7). “alternate tapping using right hand” (q8), “alternate tapping using left hand” (q9), (q8 and q9 are presented as the
average of both hands), “tapping with increasing speed using dominant hand” (q10), and “tapping with random chasing using dominant hand” (q11). MSS is the
mean of the three spiral scores of the test occasion. Numbers of occasions: Test period –3 before LCIG (n = 523), 0 (n = 523), 3 (n = 487), 6 (n = 404), 9
(n = 439), 12 (n = 372), 18 (n = 321), 24 (n = 332), 30 (n = 238), 36 (n = 113). Note that y axes are presented as truncated/different scales.

reproducibility than total UPDRS. A possible explanation for
the good reproducibility of the OTS is that this score is based
on about 28 test occasions spread evenly throughout the day
during a test week, whereas the UPDRS was based on a single
assessment occasion, which is not as suitable when symptoms
have a large natural variation.
It is a limitation of this study that the data are unbalanced, i.e.,
sample sizes for the test periods are not equal. The employment
of mixed-effects models however allowed us to use all the data
available, account dependencies within and between patients,
and model mean scores of test battery items, OTS, and dimensions, with patient ID as random effects. Nevertheless, the low
number of reports during month 30 and 36 makes conclusions
from those test periods weak. Unbalanced data with home diaries have also been reported in a recent 54-week study with
advanced PD patients, performed by Fernandez et al. [23]. At
week 54, there was a 68% drop in diary responses compared to
the baseline. This illustrates difficulties of keeping patients selfreporting in long-term studies. In this study, the difference in the
number of test occasions using the test battery from the first test
period (baseline or month 0) to month 36 was 78% and 53% at
LCIG-naı̈ve and LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients, respectively. Possible
reasons for this high drop-out rate include: the lack of feedback
to patients about their test results; absence of immediate and direct benefit to patients’ own health; usage of the test battery was
voluntary; fatigue development during the long-term study [24];

the lack of feedback to nurses about their patients’ performance
leading to deterioration of their interest toward the test battery;
and technical malfunction issues. Patients were however very
compliant with using the test battery with median compliance of
93% and user evaluations show acceptable usability [10], [22].
The need for feedback of test results is highlighted for motivating continual data entry in practice but in this study setting,
feedback was not allowed.
In both LCIG-naı̈ve and LCIG-nonnaı̈ve patients, there was
a tendency of deterioration in scores after the first year with
LCIG treatment. This may reflect expected natural progression
of PD. In a study performed by Jankovic and Kapadia [25], the
average annual decline rate in total UPDRS scores was 1.34
during the “on” state and 1.58 during the “off” state. Patients
with an older age at onset had more rapid progression of PD
compared to those with a younger age at onset. In an interim
report of this study [8], functional improvement with LCIG was
determined by the differences between baseline and consequent
visits for the total UPDRS scores. The total UPDRS was significantly improved throughout the 12-month study period and the
average improvement was 9 units between baseline and month
0, and 9.6 units between baseline and month 12. Using the same
methodology, a similar trend was observed in the mean OTS
scores during the same study period; 0.1 units (in a 0–1 scale)
between baseline and month 0, and 0.12 units between baseline
and month 12 (see Fig. 1) [26], demonstrating similar level of

1834

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

improvement. Along with total UPDRS other items of UPDRS
like dyskinesia duration (item 32) and off duration (item 39)
also improved significantly throughout the study period.
In LCIG-naı̈ve patients, mean scores of subjectively reported
dimensions, including “walking,” “satisfied,” “dyskinesia,”
and “off,” improved significantly throughout the study, but
the objectively measured dimensions, that is “tapping” and
“spiral,” did not improve. These results are in line with those of
a three-year follow-up study [27] of 25 advanced PD patients
treated with LCIG. Significant improvements with LCIG were
seen only in motor complications (UPDRS-IV) and quality of
life (PDQ-39). Tapping accuracy scores deteriorated during
our study, whereas tapping speed scores improved promptly
and remained stable after the initial LCIG treatment period. In
contrast to tapping accuracy, the tapping speed differed between
intermediate stage patients experiencing on–off fluctuations,
and clinically stable patients [28]. This finding indicates an
earlier deterioration of the tapping speed than that of tapping
accuracy in advancing patients.
The next step in our study is to assess the usefulness of
the system in everyday clinical practice. The focus will be on
determining the benefits and problems of using this system by
healthcare professionals in clinical practice including a costbenefit analysis.
In conclusion, in this 3-year follow-up study of advanced
PD patients treated with LCIG, we found that it is possible to
monitor PD progression over time using a telemetry test battery.
The significant improvements in the mean OTS scores indicate
that the test battery is able to measure a functional improvement
with LCIG that is sustained over at least 24 months. When
compared to total UPDRS, the OTS was more sensitive and had
better reproducibility.
REFERENCES
[1] A. A. Stone, S. Shiffman, J. E. Schwartz, J. E. Broderick, and
M. R. Hufford, “Patient compliance with paper and electronic diaries,”
Control Clin. Trials, vol. 24, pp. 182–199, 2003.
[2] D. Nyholm, J. Kowalski, and S. M. Aquilonius, “Wireless real-time electronic data capture for self-assessment of motor function and quality of
life in Parkinson’s disease,” Mov. Disord., vol. 19, pp. 446–451, 2004.
[3] M. B. Davidson, D. J. McGhee, and C. E. Counsell, “Comparison of patient rated treatment response with measured improvement in Parkinson’s
disease,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 83, pp. 1001–1005, 2012.
[4] C. G. Goetz, G. T. Stebbins, D. Wolff, W. DeLeeuw, H. Bronte-Stewart,
R. Elble M. Hallett, J. Nutt, L. Ramig, T. Sanger, A. D. Wu, P. H. Kraus,
L. M. Blasucci, E. A. Shamim, K. D. Sethi, J. Spielman, K. Kubota, A. S.
Grove, E. Dishman, C. B. Taylor, “Testing objective measures of motor
impairment in early Parkinson’s disease: Feasibility study of an at-home
testing device,” Mov. Disord., vol. 24, pp. 551–556, 2009.
[5] T. O. Mera, D. A. Heldman, A. J. Espay, M. Payne, and J. P. Giuffrida,
“Feasibility of home-based automated Parkinson’s disease motor assessment,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 203, pp. 152–156, 2012.
[6] R. I. Griffiths, K. Kotschet, S. Arfon, Z. M. Xu, W. Johnson, J. Drago,
A. Evans, P. Kempster, S. Raghav, M. K. Horne, “Automated assessment
of bradykinesia and dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Parkinson’s
Disease, vol. 2, pp. 47–55, 2012.
[7] D. Pan, R. Dhall, and D. B. Petitti, “A mobile cloud-based Parkinson’s
disease assessment system for home-based monitoring,” JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth, vol. 26, 2015.
[8] S. E. Pålhagen, N. Dizdar, T. Hauge, B. Holmberg, R. Jansson, J. Linder,
D. Nyholm, O. Sydow, M. Wainwright, H. Widner, A. Johansson, “Interim analysis of long-term intraduodenal levodopa infusion in advanced
Parkinson disease,” Acta Neurol. Scand., vol. 126, pp. 29–33, 2012.

[9] D. Nyholm, “Duodopa treatment for advanced Parkinson’s disease: A
review of efficacy and safety,” Parkinsonism Relat. Disord., vol. 18,
pp. 916–929, 2012.
[10] J. Westin, M. Dougherty, D. Nyholm, and T. Groth, “A home environment
test battery for status assessment in patients with Parkinson’s disease,”
Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 98, pp. 27–35, 2010.
[11] D. Nyholm, A. I. Nilsson Remahl, N. Dizdar, R. Constantinescu, B. Holmberg, R. Jansson, S. M. Aquilonius, H. Askmark, “Duodenal levodopa
infusion monotherapy vs oral polypharmacy in advanced Parkinson disease,” Neurology, vol. 64, pp. 216–223, 2005.
[12] G. Giovannoni, J. V. Schalkwyk, V. U. Fritz, and A. J. Lees, “Bradykinesia
akinesia incoordination test (BRAIN TEST): An objective computerised
assessment of upper limb motor function,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 67, pp. 624–629, 1999.
[13] A. L. T. Tavares, G. S. Jefferis, M. Koop, B. C. Hill, T. Hastie, G. Heit,
H. M. Bronte-Stewart, “Quantitative measurements of alternating finger
tapping in Parkinson’s disease correlate with UPDRS motor disability and
reveal the improvement in fine motor control from medication and deep
brain stimulation,” Mov. Disord., vol. 20, pp. 1286–1298, 2005.
[14] L. M. Williams, E. Simms, C. R. Clark, R. H. Paul, D. Rowe, and
E. Gordon, “The test-retest reliability of a standardized neurocognitive and neurophysiological test battery: Neuromarker,” Int. J. Neurosci.,
vol. 115, pp. 1605–1630, 2005.
[15] X. Liu, C. B. Carroll, S. Y. Wang, J. Zajicek, and P. G. Bain, “Quantifying
drug-induced dyskinesias in the arms using digitized spiral-drawing tasks,”
J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 144, pp. 47–52, 2005.
[16] J. Westin, S. Ghiamati, M. Memedi, D. Nyholm, A. Johansson, M.
Dougherty, T. Groth, “A new computer method for assessing drawing
impairment in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 190, pp.
143–148, 2010.
[17] M. Memedi, J. Westin, D. Nyholm, M. Dougherty, and T. Groth, “A
web application for follow-up of results from a mobile device test battery
for Parkinson’s disease patients,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed.,
vol. 104, pp. 219–226, 2011.
[18] J. Pinheiro and D. Bates, Mixed-Effects Models in S and S-Plus. New
York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[19] C. G. Goetz, G. T. Stebbins, K. A. Chung, R. A. Hauser, J. M. Miyasaki,
A. P. Nicholas, W. Poewe, K. Seppi, O. Rascol, M. A. Stacy, J. G. Nutt, C.
M. Tanner, A. Urkowitz, J. A. Jaglin, S. Ge, “Which dyskinesia scale best
detects treatment response?” Mov. Disord., vol. 28, pp. 341–346, 2013.
[20] S. S. Papapetropoulos, “Patient diaries as a clinical endpoint in Parkinson’s
disease clinical trials,” CNS Neurosci. Ther., vol. 18, pp. 380–387, 2012.
[21] F. Marzinzik, M. Wahl, C. M. Doletschek, C. Jugel, C. Rewitzer, and
F. Klostermann, “Evaluation of a telemedical care programme for patients
with Parkinson’s disease,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 322–327,
2012.
[22] J. Westin, M. Schiavella, M. Memedi, D. Nyholm, M. Dougherty, and
A. Antonini, “Validation of a home environment test battery for assessments in advanced Parkinson’s disease,” Neurol. Sci., vol. 33, pp. 831–838,
2012.
[23] H. H. Fernandez, A. Vanagunas, P. Odin, A. J. Espay, R. A. Hauser,
D. G. Standaert, K. Chatamra, J. Benesh, Y. Pritchett, S. L. Hass, R. A.
Lenz, “Levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel in advanced Parkinson’s disease
open-label study: Interim results,” Parkinsonism Relat. Disord., vol. 19,
pp. 339–345, 2013.
[24] G. Alves, T. Wentzel-Larsen, and J. P. Larsen, “Is fatigue an independent
and persistent symptom in patients with Parkinson’s disease?” Neurology,
vol. 63, pp. 1908–1911, 2004.
[25] J. Jankovic and A. S. Kapadia, “Functional decline in Parkinson disease,”
Arch. Neurol., vol. 58, pp. 1611–1615, 2001.
[26] J. Westin, D. Nyholm, A. Johansson, M. Memedi, M. Dougherty, T. Groth,
S. Pålhagen , “12-month results from a novel test battery used in a duodenal
levodopa infusion trial,” Eur. J. Neurol., vol. 17, p. 21, 2010.
[27] M. Zibetti, A. Merola, V. Ricchi, A. Marchisio, C. A. Artusi, L. Rizzi, E.
Montanaro, D. Reggio, C. De Angelis, M. Rizzone, L. Lopiano, “Longterm duodenal levodopa infusion in Parkinson’s disease: A 3-year motor
and cognitive follow-up study,” J. Neurol., vol. 260, pp. 105–114, 2013.
[28] M. Memedi, J. Westin, and D. Nyholm, “Spiral drawing during self-rated
dyskinesia is more impaired than during self-rated off,” Parkinsonism
Relat. Disord., vol. 19, pp. 553–556, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

