IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

805

Image-Based Tissue Distribution Modeling
for Skeletal Muscle Quality Characterization
S. Makrogiannis∗ , K. W. Fishbein, A. Z. Moore, R. G. Spencer, and L. Ferrucci

Abstract—The identification and characterization of regional
body tissues is essential to understand changes that occur with aging and age-related metabolic diseases such as diabetes and obesity
and how these diseases affect trajectories of health and functional
status. Imaging technologies are frequently used to derive volumetric, area, and density measurements of different tissues. Despite the
significance and direct applicability of automated tissue quantification and characterization techniques, these topics have remained
relatively underexplored in the medical image analysis literature.
We present a method for identification and characterization of
muscle and adipose tissue in the midthigh region using MRI. We
propose an image-based muscle quality prediction technique that
estimates tissue-specific probability density models and their eigenstructures in the joint domain of water- and fat-suppressed voxel
signal intensities along with volumetric and intensity-based tissue
characteristics computed during the quantification stage. We evaluated the predictive capability of our approach against reference
biomechanical muscle quality (MQ) measurements using statistical tests and classification performance experiments. The reference
standard for MQ is defined as the ratio of muscle strength to muscle
mass. The results show promise for the development of noninvasive
image-based MQ descriptors.
Index Terms—Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), probabilistic
modeling, tissue identification and characterization.

I. INTRODUCTION
HANGES in body composition occur in all aging individuals and have profound influences on risk for diseases and
decline of physical function. Assessment of body composition
is critical in the study of age-related and metabolic diseases [1],
[2]. Loss in muscle strength and mass associated with aging—
termed as sarcopenia—is a correlate of poor function and a risk
factor for limited mobility. This pathological condition has important health and economic implications. In the East Boston
cohort of the Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies
of the Elderly, it was observed that 38% of the men and 59%
of the women over 65 years of age had difficulty stooping, and
24% of men and 29% of the women had difficulty lifting their

C

Manuscript received January 3, 2015; revised July 10, 2015; accepted August
19, 2015. Date of publication August 28, 2015; date of current version March
17, 2016. This work was supported by in part by the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under
Grant SC3GM113754, in part by the Intramural Research Program of National
Institute on Aging, NIH, and in part by the Center for Research and Education
in Optical Sciences and Applications (CREOSA) of Delaware State University
funded by NSF CREST-8763.
* S. Makrogiannis is with the Mathematical Sciences Department, Delaware
State University, Dover, DE 19901-2277 USA (e-mail: smakrogiannis@
desu.edu).
K. W. Fishbein, A. Z. Moore, R. G. Spencer, and L. Ferrucci are with the
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2474305

arm over the shoulder height [3]. It is estimated that a large portion of such disability is attributed to muscle impairment. Direct
healthcare costs due to sarcopenia in the U.S. in 2000 were estimated to exceed $18.5 billion dollars [4]. It has been shown
that age-related loss in muscle strength is caused in part by a
decline in muscle mass [5]. However, it is becoming clear that
decline in muscle strength that occurs with aging is much larger
than what would be expected by changes in muscle mass alone
[6]. To explain this discrepancy, investigators have explored the
relationship between skeletal muscle composition and structure,
and functional measures of muscle strength. For example, it is
widely acknowledged that fat infiltration in the muscle may contribute to muscle weakness, metabolic diseases and frailty [7].
Therefore, image analysis techniques that could capture tissue
characteristics associated with muscle quality (MQ) are attracting considerable interest.
Medical imaging technologies provide a noninvasive and accurate means for body composition assessment. The more frequently utilized imaging modalities in related clinical studies
are computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging [1], [8]–[11]. MR imaging can distinguish different
types of soft tissue, especially if tissue-selective imaging techniques are used [8], [12]. CT has also been used to characterize MQ as a correlate to muscle strength [1], [13] mainly
because the voxel intensities are measured in the standardized
Hounsfield unit scale and due to the relatively fast image acquisition speed. Despite the increasing interest in assessment
of MQ by medical imaging, the specific literature on this topic
is limited. Most of the published studies have employed supervised workflows, including manual segmentation and selection
of regions-of-interest (ROIs), to quantify tissue volumes and
tissue intensity averages. More importantly, there have been, to
the best of our knowledge, no previous reports on automated
muscle characterization with MRI.
In this report, we propose a method for assessment of MQ
from tissue-selective MRI. This method is applied to volumetric
nonsuppressed (NS), water-suppressed (WS) and fat-suppressed
(FS) images acquired at the midthigh level. An example of our
data is displayed in Fig. 1. Tissue segmentation follows the main
stages of the method proposed in [11]. After the segmentation
of subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) and bone, we estimated
muscle and intermuscular adipose tissue (IMAT) normal density
models in the joint domain of WS and FS voxel intensities, and
produced a MQ descriptor using subspace decomposition of
muscle and statistical measures of variability. Our premise is
that this set of features can be used to assess MQ. Here, we test
the method in its ability to discriminate between individuals with
high and low MQ. The reference standard for MQ is a functional

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 1. Example of a nonsuppressed volumetric MR image from our dataset,
centered at the midthigh region. The tissue identification and characterization
technique is applied to the designated midthigh region.

measure defined as the ratio of muscle strength to muscle mass.
Our experiments suggest that the proposed descriptor extracts
information that is relevant for prediction of MQ.
II. TISSUE IDENTIFICATION
The objective of this stage is to identify regional adipose
tissue, muscle, and bone compartments as seen in Fig. 2 and
to extract information related to the volume of different tissues
and their distribution of intensities.
In the first stage, we identified the midthigh ROI along
the superior–inferior axis to restrict our analysis within the
anatomical site of interest. We then applied the N4ITK inhomogeneity correction algorithm [14] on the set of non-,
water-and fat-suppressed images. This algorithm reduces the
low-frequency intensity nonuniformity, or bias, that is present
in MRI data and is more pronounced for scanners with higher B0
field, such as 3 T and above. In this method, authors first assumed
an image formation model with multiplicative bias field of the
form v(ω) = u(ω)f (ω), where v is the acquired image, u is the
ideal image, f is the bias field, and ω ∈ Ω is the vector of spatial
coordinates for an N -dimensional image, hence Ω ⊆ ZN . The
logarithmic form of this model is v̂(ω) = û(ω) + fˆ(ω), where
v̂(ω) = logv(ω), û(ω) = logu(ω), and fˆ(ω) = logf (ω). The
objective is to restore the original image û(ω) = v̂(ω) − fˆ(ω).
A numerical solution is found in an iterative scheme ûn =
v̂ n −1 − fˆer at the nth iteration. The residual bias field fˆer is
approximated using B-splinesS ∗ {} in multiple resolutions by
fˆer = S ∗ {ûn −1 − E û | ûn −1 }.
Next, we linearly coregistered the FS and WS images into
the NS spatial domain to correct for possible subject motion
using the method proposed in [15]. Because the optimization
functions in image registration are in general nonconvex, the
authors proposed cost function apodization and a global-local
optimization method. We used mutual information-based cost
function to address multimodal variations.

Fig. 2. Top: FS and WS images that we use in our method. The ROI is
outlined by the red box that can be seen in orthoplanar and 3-D views. It is
centered at midthigh and it covers the whole cross-sectional region of the left
thigh. Bottom: Segmented muscle, SAT and IMAT regions produced by our
tissue quantification algorithm. In this visualization, we removed the anterior
part of the thigh to display all internal tissues and their identified regions.

After the coregistration, we applied linear intensity transformations to standardize the MR intensity dynamic range and
reduce the intersubject variability. We identified the fat region
using centroid clustering [16] on the NS volumetric image and
used the average fat intensities of NS, FS, and WS volumes
as reference values to linearly scale the voxel intensities and
standardize their dynamic range. Our hypothesis is that the fat
tissue intensities are mostly dominated by the subcutaneous fat,
whose MR intensity values are largely invariant to the physiological factors, therefore, can be used as a reference point to
define linear intensity transformations.
After selecting one leg using the spatial image coordinates,
we used parametric active contour models to extract the subcutaneous fat of the selected leg in the nonsuppressed image.
In short, these physics-based models [17] guide the deformation of a parametric contour toward the boundary between the
subcutaneous fat and the muscle under the influence of imagebased, internal and external forces seeking energy minimization. The authors
 1 in [17] defined an energy functional of the
form Etotal = 0 [Eint (v(s)) + Eim (v(s)) + Eext (v(s))]ds, for
a parametric closed-curve representation v(s) = (x(s), y(s))
with s ∈ [0, 1] and (x, y) ∈ Ω, where Ω ⊆ Z2 is the image
spatial domain. The image-based energy Eim is computed
from the image gradient magnitude so that the snake is attracted to image edges, hence Eim (v(s)) = −|∇(Gσ ∗ I)|2 ,

MAKROGIANNIS et al.: IMAGE-BASED TISSUE DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL MUSCLE QUALITY CHARACTERIZATION

where Gσ denotes a Gaussian kernel with σ standard deviation. The internal energy Eint penalizes stretching and bending, Eint (v(s)) = (1/2)(α|v  (s)| + β|v  (s)|), where α, β are
the penalty weights. We used a balloon external force Eext to
guide the snake from the internal SAT surface to its muscle
interface. The minimizing snake is the solution of the Euler
equation that is found numerically using a discrete system [17].
Here, we implemented active contour segmentation in a multiscale hierarchical scheme. That is, starting from a coarser scale
an approximate solution is found that is used as initial condition for finer scale segmentation. Following this strategy, we
achieved faster convergence.
Next, we removed the bone region as follows: we first applied
multiple Otsu thresholding to identify the air, fat, and muscle
groups on the nonsuppressed image, and then, ranked the regions
according to their circularity to select the bone marrow. Finally,
we used morphological operations with adaptive recursion to
label voxels previously unclassified due to the partial volume
effect between bone marrow and cortical bone as cortical bone.

We hypothesize that statistical models of MR muscle and
IMAT voxel intensity distributions can define a predictive descriptor of fatty infiltration in skeletal muscle. We first modeled
the joint WS and FS intensities by a two-component Gaussian
mixture model (GMM) corresponding to muscle and IMAT. We
then computed the eigenstructure of joint water- and fat- suppressed signal intensity distributions from MRI data. The parametric probability models together with the computed eigenvectors and eigenvalues define a multiparametric descriptor of fat
infiltration in midthigh muscle.
The normal density parametric model of a voxel intensity
sample X in the joint intensity domain [FS, WS] for each tissue
type denoted by Ntissue is defined as
1
.
D
/2
(2π)
|Ctissue |1/2

−1
exp(−1/2(X − Mtissue )T Ctissue
(X − Mtissue ))

(X |ω muscle ,M muscle ,C muscle )
(ω IMAT )
− PP (ω
according to the
g(X) = NNmuscle
IMAT (X |ω IMAT ,M IMAT ,C IMAT )
muscle )
Bayesian framework. The estimated tissue distribution models
correspond to ellipsoids in the 2-D sample domain.
In the next step, we aim to obtain a transformed feature space
in which to define measures of compactness of computed tissue
distribution models under the hypothesis that the dispersion of
samples is caused by fat infiltration into the muscle. A solution
in the least-square sense is obtained by finding the unit vectors
utissue that maximize uTtissue Ctissue utissue , subject to the constraint ||utissue || = 1 [16] with tissue ∈ T = {muscle, IMAT}.
Using Lagrangian multiplier optimization, with λtissue being the
undetermined multiplier, we seek to optimize

L(utissue , λtissue ) = uTtissue Ctissue utissue
−λtissue (uTtissue utissue − 1).
By setting

∂L
∂ ut is s u e

(3)

= 0, we arrive at the eigenvalue problem

Ctissue utissue = λtissue utissue .

(4)

After solving (4), the covariance matrices Ctissue of muscle and
IMAT can be factored as

III. TISSUE DISTRIBUTION MODELS

Ntissue (X|ωtissue , Mtissue , Ctissue ) =

807

(1)

each
where tissue ∈ T = {muscle, IMAT}, ωtissue denotes
 tis
(i,j )
FS
WS
T
sue class, Mtissue = [μtissue , μtissue ] , Ctissue = σtissue with
(i, j) ∈ {WS2 , WS × FS, FS × WS, FS2 } and D = 2 is the dimensionality of [FS, WS] domain. The muscle and IMAT distributions produce the observed Gaussian mixture
p(X | Mtissue , Ctissue ) =

[atissue · Ntissue (X|ωtissue , Mtissue , Ctissue )] . (2)
tissue∈T

We used the Expectation-Maximization (E-M) algorithm to
fit the Gaussian mixture model and find Ntissue (X|ωtissue ,
Mtissue , Ctissue ) and atissue ∀ tissue ∈ T . We note that atissue =
P (ωtissue ), where P (ωtissue ) denotes the prior probability of
each tissue. Given the tissue density models Ntissue and priors
P (ωtissue ) we classified each voxel into the IMAT or muscle group using the likelihood ratio-based discriminant function

Ctissue =

D


λ̂itissue ûitissue ûitissue T

(5)

i=1

where λ̂itissue , ûitissue are the computed eigenvalues and eigenvectors for each tissue density model. The eigenvectors define
the orientations of the ellipsoids approximating the tissue density distributions in the joint [FS,WS] domain. The corresponding eigenvalues are proportional to the length of the principal
axes. Moreover, the determinants of these covariance matrices
are equal to the product of the principal axis lengths
|Ctissue | =

D


λ̂itissue ≥ 0.

(6)

i=1

Fig. 3 helps to explain the rationale behind the proposed tissue
distribution modeling. This figure illustrates the tissue intensity
distributions of three thigh MRI samples corresponding to low,
medium, and high MQ reference measurements computed as
the ratio of muscle strength to muscle volume. Muscle strength
is a functional variable obtained by isokinetic dynamometry and
muscle volume is computed from supervised muscle delineation
and anthropometric measures as explained in the experiments
section. We display the scatterplots of labeled muscle and IMAT
samples after E-M clustering in the joint domain of WS and FS
image intensities, the corresponding tissue distribution models,
and the scatterplot of the muscle samples overlaid on the muscle
distribution model using an enlarged vertical and horizontal
scale for visualization purposes.
We draw three central conclusions from this analysis. First, we
note that the lengths of both principal axes increase with decreasing MQ. We attribute this to the infiltration of skeletal muscle
with fat—a major contributor to MQ decline—that increases the
inhomogeneity of muscle intensity distribution. If a larger proportion of muscle mass is fat, then a lower proportion of the mass
consists of contractile proteins, which explains the low MQ. Second, the orientation of principal axes differs somewhat between

808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 3. (From left to right) Examples of MRI scans at the midthigh site for subjects exhibiting low, medium, and high MQ; scatterplots show muscle and IMAT
voxel intensities in WS and FS scans; tissue classification and estimated muscle and fat distribution models in the [WS,FS] domain; scatterplots and distribution
models of the muscle group only.

the different levels of MQ because of varying correlation between the sample components (sometimes caused by intensity
inhomogeneities or other quality artifacts), so it may be beneficial to identify the dispersion along principal axes rather than
in the original domain of FS and WS intensities. Equivalently,
this method performs decomposition of the voxel intensities into
subspaces of reduced intervariable correlation, thus producing
more accurate estimation. Third, this approach is amenable to
MRI analysis because it computes relative distances in the feature space of standardized intensities as described in Section II.
This representation is therefore not dependent on the absolute
MRI voxel intensities, which may vary between different scans.
IV. TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION
In this stage, we developed a machine learning system to
classify subjects into high and low MQ based on MRI-derived
features produced by the tissue quantification and distribution
modeling stages.
Our technique produced the following features; 1) tissue
distribution model parameters including the means, covariances,
and eigenspace parameters of muscle and intermuscular adipose
tissue described in Section III, 2) {NS, FS, WS} scaled intensity means as described in Section II, computed over the muscle, subcutaneous fat, intermuscular adipose tissue, and bone

regions, and 3) average areas over the ROI, and area fraction
measurements of the muscle, subcutaneous fat, intermuscular
adipose tissue, and bone. The resulting dimensionality of the
joint domain is 40. The complete list of features can be found
in Appendix A.
Starting with the full feature domain, we applied a dimensionality reduction stage. We first implemented a Fisher’s distance ranking-based feature selection approach that we denote by FDR. This method computes the Fisher’s distance (or
F-score) for each feature. Greater distances correspond to features that produce increased separation; therefore, we next
sorted distances in descending order and selected the highest
scores according to a user-defined threshold. In addition, we
employed the hierarchical dimensionality reduction technique
[16] denoted by HDR. This method computes the correlation
between all feature pairs and iteratively merges the pair of
maximum correlation, thus reducing redundancy in the feature
space. Both FDR and HDR can be considered correlation-based
methods, but FDR selects the more discriminant features after univariate tests, whereas HDR reduces the redundancy by
removing features that are very highly correlated with other
features in our space. The third approach that we utilized was
the minimum redundancy-maximum relevance (MRMR) feature selection method [18]. This method uses mutual information to measure the entropy produced by each feature set and

MAKROGIANNIS et al.: IMAGE-BASED TISSUE DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL MUSCLE QUALITY CHARACTERIZATION

809

TABLE I
LIST OF FEATURES WITH STATISTICALLY SIGNIFICANT p-VALUES AND
CORRESPONDING FISHER’S DISTANCES
Feature
M-FS-SIA
IMAT-FS-SIA
B-FS-SIA
M-FS-EMA
IMAT-FS-EMA
M-FSFS-COV
IMAT-FSFS-COV
IMAT-FSWS-COV
M-CM-EVE11
M-CM-EVE12
M-CM-EVA1
IMAT-CM-EVE12
IMAT-CM-EVA1
IMAT-CM-DET

Fig. 4. TPR and TNR versus MQ for classification using all features and
repeated tenfold cross validation. The threshold for generating classes of low
and high MQ is defined as the point of intersection of TPR and TNR.

appropriately selects the set of features that minimizes the redundancy and maximizes the relevance.
We utilized support vector machines [19] to build our classification models. Our decision was mainly driven by the wide
applicability and good performance of support vector machines
in variable classification problems. We tested the hypothesis
that our image-based analysis can characterize MQ by cross
validation of our classifier against labeled samples of high and
low MQ.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
We validated the performance of our descriptor against reference biomechanical MQ measurements computed from clinical
variables collected in the same study. Maximum quadriceps
muscle strength was defined as the highest value of torque from
the left leg in up to three consecutive measures of concentric
knee extensor strength at an angular velocity of 0.52 rad/s using an isokinetic dynamometer (Kin-Com model 125E, ver. 3.2;
Chattanooga Group, Chattanooga, TN, USA). Cross-sectional
thigh muscle area was measured from midthigh CT slices with
10-mm slice thickness acquired on a Somatom CT scanner (Somatom Sensation 10; Siemens, Malvern, PA, USA), and quantified using a supervised quantification workflow (Geanie software, ver. 2.1; BonAlyze, Jyvaskyla, Finland). The MQ measure
KE
was defined as MQ = CSATMTM
·H , where TKE is the knee extensor torque, CSAMTM is the midthigh muscle cross-sectional area,
and H is the participant’s height [2].
To determine a threshold for separating the subjects between
low and high MQ, we first divided the MQ range of our measurements into 100 intervals, trained and tested our classifier
using the complete set of features in a repeated tenfold crossvalidation experiment, and plotted the true positive rate (TPR)
and true negative rate (TNR) for each MQ value as displayed
in Fig. 4. We then selected as threshold between the low and
high MQ subjects the point of intersection between TPR and
TNR for minimal classification error. The resulting threshold is
63.1 (N · m/cm3 ).

p-value

Fisher’s distance

0.000299
0.00056
0.0031
0.0054
0.0045
0.034
0.0085
0.030
0.020
0.027
0.034
0.041
0.0085
0.030

0.479
0.455
0.387
0.361
0.371
0.273
0.351
0.279
0.315
0.289
0.272
0.260
0.351
0.282

We performed tissue quantification over a subset of MRI
data acquired on an Achieva 3T scanner (Philips Healthcare,
Best, The Netherlands) for the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of
Aging, which is an ongoing, prospective study of longitudinal
physical and cognitive changes associated with aging and agerelated diseases [20]. Three scans were acquired sequentially
using a 3-D multislice FFE pulse sequence, with parameters:
repetition delay T R = 25 ms, echo time T E = 3.8 ms, and
flip angle 25◦ . The first scan was acquired without fat or water suppression while the second and third scans were acquired
with water- and fat suppression, respectively, using the selective
pulse inversion recovery technique provided on the Philips platform. The entire thigh region was imaged with 80 5-mm-thick
slices with in-plane resolution of 0.98 × 0.98 mm2 and the field
of view was 440 mm × 300 mm × 400 mm. The participants
remained at rest before and during MRI acquisition according
to the imaging protocol.
In our experiments, we defined cube-shaped ROIs with the
same orientation as the volumetric MRI. The ROI centerpoint
is determined to be the midpoint between the femur head and
patella of the left leg, which was also the centerpoint of the
volumetric MRI during acquisition. The superior–inferior length
of ROI was fixed at 25 mm. The ROI in-plane dimensions are
equal to the MRI in-plane field of view noted in the previous
paragraph. An ROI example is displayed in Fig. 2. We applied
our tissue identification and characterization techniques to the
part of each MRI scan defined by these ROIs. Furthermore, in
order to reduce the effect of gender differences on our analysis,
we selected a cohort of female participants. Our final dataset
consisted of 64 female subjects with age 67.44 ± 3.15 (95%
CI) years.
To estimate the group separation produced by each feature,
we first calculated p-values produced by t-tests and Fisher’s
distances. Table I contains the list of statistically significant features with p < 0.05, the corresponding p-values, and the Fisher’s
distances. Out of the 14 features with statistically significant pvalues, 11 originated from the proposed tissue density modeling
in the original or the transformed feature space, but none of these
features was related to absolute tissue area measurements. Table II displays the pairs of highly correlated features that were

810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

TABLE II
PAIRS OF FEATURES MERGED BY THE HDR ALGORITHM
Feature 1

TABLE IV
ESTIMATES OF TPR, TNR, ACC, P r, G MEAN , AND FMEASURE FOR SEPARATION
BETWEEN LOW AND HIGH MQ SUBJECTS USING REPEATED
TENFOLD CROSS VALIDATION

Feature 2

IMAT-AA
M-CV-EVA1
IMAT-CV-EVA1
M-WS-EMA
IMAT-WS-EMA
IMAT-CV-EVE12
M-CV-EVE12
M-WSWS-COV
IMAT-FS-EMA
IMAT-FS-SIA
IMAT-WS-EMA

M-AF
M-FSFS-COV
IMAT-FSFS-COV
M-WS-SIA
IMAT-WS-SIA
IMAT-CV-EVE11
M-CV-EVE11
M-WS-EMA
M-FS-EMA
M-FS-SIA
IMAT-NS-SIA

TABLE III
LIST OF FEATURES SELECTED BY THE MRMR ALGORITHM

Feature Domain
D
TPR(% )
TNR(% )
ACC(% )
P r (% )
G mean (% )
F measure (% )

Complete

FDR

HDR

MRMR

40
69.6 ± 0.8
73.1 ± 0.9
71.4 ± 0.6
72.2 ± 0.7
71.3 ± 0.6
70.9 ± 0.7

7
55.7 ± 0.6
82.6 ± 1.0
69.2 ± 0.6
76.5 ± 1.0
67.8 ± 0.5
64.4 ± 0.6

29
69.0 ± 0.9
69.5 ± 1.0
69.3 ± 0.7
69.4 ± 0.8
69.2 ± 0.7
69.2 ± 0.7

12
68.2 ± 1.1
73.6 ± 1.4
70.9 ± 0.9
72.4 ± 1.1
70.7 ± 0.9
70.1 ± 0.9

D represents the dimensionality (number of features) considered in each classification scheme.

TABLE V
ESTIMATES OF TPR, TNR, ACC, P r, G MEAN , FMEASURE , AND THE AUC OF
ROC FOR CLASSIFICATION OF LOW AND HIGH MQ SUBJECTS USING
LEAVE-ONE-OUT CROSS VALIDATION

Feature
Feature Domain
IMAT-FS-SIA
IMAT-AA
B-NS-SIA
IMAT-WSWS-COV
M-AF
IMAT-CM-EVE12
M-CM-EVE11
IMAT-FSFS-COV
M-WS-SIA
B-FS-SIA
B-WS-SIA
M-CM-EVE12

iteratively merged to perform dimensionality reduction according to HDR. This technique identified increased correlation between covariance and eigenvalue features, and intensity means
and GMM parameters, as expected. The limitation of HDR is
that it does not explicitly seek the most discriminant features.
Table III lists the features selected by MRMR in our classification experiments. Out of the 12 selected features, 5 features
originated from our intensity distribution model parameters either in the standardized or the transformed domain, 5 features
were mean estimates in the standardized intensity domain, and
the remaining 2 were the mean IMAT area computed over the
ROI—that is, a volumetric measure—and the muscle area fraction, which is defined as the fraction of mean muscle area over
the sum of the mean muscle area and mean IMAT area. It is interesting that the last two tissue area-related features have also
been identified as possible predictors of muscular degeneration.
In addition, we trained and tested a support vector machinebased classifier to separate low MQ from high MQ participants
in the same feature domain. Classification accuracy was estimated in a stratified tenfold cross-validation framework. The
stratification was employed to ensure that the number of subjects
assigned to each class was approximately equal in the training
and testing phases. Furthermore, the tenfold cross-validation
technique reduced the possible effect of overfitting. Each crossvalidation experiment was repeated 100 times to reduce variability due to randomized fold selection. Moreover, we repeated
our aforementioned experiments using leave-one-out cross

D
TPR(% )
TNR(% )
ACC(% )
P r (% )
G mean (% )
F measure (% )
AUC

Complete

FDR

HDR

MRMR

40
77.4
69.7
73.4
70.6
73.5
73.8
0.694

7
71.0
75.8
73.4
73.3
73.3
72.1
0.703

29
74.2
69.7
71.9
69.7
71.9
71.9
0.662

12
64.5
90.9
78.1
87.0
76.6
74.1
0.767

D represents the dimensionality (number of features) considered
in each classification scheme.

validation. Classification performance metrics produced by the
different domains are summarized in Tables IV and V.
To estimate classification performance, we used the following
measures derived from the contingency table.
1) TPR, also called Recall, or Sensitivity—Ratio of true positives TP to the number of detected positives P given by
TPR = TP
P .
2) TNR, also called Specificity—Ratio of true negatives TN
to the number of negatives N given by TNR = TN
N .
3) ACC—Ratio of sum of true positives and true negatives
to the total number of positives and negatives: ACC =
TP+TN
P +N .
4) Precision (P r)—Ratio of true positives to the sum of true
TP
. This equals the
positives and false positives P r = TP+FP
Positive Predictive Value.
5) G
√mean —Geometric mean of TPR and TNR, Gmean =
TPR · TNR.
6) Fmeasure —Calculated according to Fmeasure = 1 +2 1 .
P r
TPR
The repeated tenfold cross-validation results in Table IV—
presented as mean ± 95% confidence interval half width—
indicated that our analysis technique can separate low from
high MQ subjects with an accuracy of 71.4 ± 0.6% in the
complete feature space. Among the reduced feature spaces, the
MRMR method produced the highest classification accuracy at
70.9 ± 0.9%. The hierarchical dimensionality reduction technique with a correlation threshold at 95%, which iteratively
merged features with greater than 95% correlation, yielded
classification accuracy of 69.3 ± 0.7% in a domain reduced to

MAKROGIANNIS et al.: IMAGE-BASED TISSUE DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL MUSCLE QUALITY CHARACTERIZATION

Fig. 5. Receiver-operating-curve (ROC) performance estimation for leaveone-out cross validation of different feature selection methods. We note that
MRMR produces the largest area-under-the-curve among the tested approaches.

29 features. Feature selection by Fisher’s distance ranking using a threshold of 0.35 produced accuracy of 69.2 ± 0.6% and
dimensionality D = 7. We experimentally determined that an Fscore threshold of 0.35 indicates reasonable separation between
the two compared groups. Other classification metrics that balance the true positive and true negative rates, such as Gmean and
the Fmeasure , in general produce similar results as ACC. Similarly
to our univariate tests, features selected by MRMR were mostly
related to FS intensity averages, covariances in the [FS,WS]
domain, and associated eigencomponents.
The leave-one-out cross-validation experiments yielded some
interesting results (see Table V). The MRMR technique produced the highest classification accuracy at 78.1%, followed
by the complete feature domain and Fisher’s distance ranking
at 73.4%, and hierarchical dimensionality reduction at 71.9%.
We also computed ROC performance for the leave-one-out cross
validation, as displayed in Fig. 5. We note that MRMR produced
the largest area under the curve (AUC) among the tested feature selection approaches. The superior performance of MRMR
may be attributed to the fact that it simultaneously reduces the
redundancy and optimizes for relevance of the feature set as
explained in [18].
We observe that the sets of more discriminant features selected by the Student’s t-test and MRMR dimensionality reduction, shown in Tables I and III, lend credence to our premise
that the proposed tissue intensity distribution models contribute
to the prediction of low MQ. Also, our feature selection and
classification results reported in Tables III–V, suggest that the
MR intensity standardization using SAT reference intensities
largely suppresses the effects of intersubject variability on the
dynamic range of MR voxel intensities, therefore, producing
discriminant features. Nevertheless, the standardized intensities
may still change when different MRI acquisition parameters,
such as flip angle and TR, are used. In addition, our multivariate
classification experiments indicated an encouraging separation
between groups of low and high MQ, further supporting the

811

relationship between characteristics of muscle composition and
function.
The fact that the proposed methodology is automated, is by
itself an advantage that greatly reduces the need for manual
delineation of tissues and quantification. When considering the
computational cost of this approach, the computational time for
segmentation and feature calculation over an ROI of five slices
is 56.6 ± 0.8 s. The feature selection and prediction procedures
at the online stage—that is, excluding the offline training—
are very fast: 10−4 ± 3.5 × 10−6 s for the complete domain,
6 × 10−4 ± 2.7 × 10−5 s for FDR, 2.4 × 10−3 ± 2.8 × 10−5 s
for HDR, and 1.1 × 10−3 ± 2.2 × 10−5 s for MRMR. These
computational times were obtained from our MATLAB implementation on a Linux-based platform with an 8-core Intel Xeon
x86_64 CPU at 3.3 GHz and with 8 GB of RAM. We used
the MATLAB wrapper of the libsvm library for support vector
machine classification. The segmentation code can be significantly optimized for time and space once it is implemented in a
compiled language such as C/C++.
As an alternative means of acquiring distinct fat and water images for determination of MQ, one could employ the so-called
Dixon technique [21]–[23]. Dixon sequences achieve fat-water
separation based on the chemical shift difference between fat
and water and the consequent modulations of the echo train generated by a multiecho sequence, and do not rely upon chemical
species suppression as in this study. This study was performed
in the absence of this specialized capability, but nevertheless
demonstrates our ability to perform MQ assessments and correlations. These outcome measures are essentially independent
of whether the method we chose, or a Dixon method, was used
for data acquisition.
Although the assessment of MQ could be estimated in clinical practice by simpler measures such as DEXA and hand grip,
those simpler measures do not provide any clue on the origin
and pathophysiology of the decline in MQ with aging and diseases. On the contrary, particular imaging characteristics that
are associated with lower MQ may help understanding the underlying mechanisms of the decline in MQ with aging, and
therefore, suggest possible interventions, and provide biomarkers for tracking their effectiveness. For example, the findings of
this study suggest that muscle fat infiltration is one nonexhaustive mechanism that leads to reduced MQ. Thus, intervention
that prevents muscle fat infiltration is likely to be effective in
preventing the decline in MQ with aging. The proposed analysis could also be utilized to track the effect of interventions
that may theoretically improve MQ, such as resistance exercise. It is well known that resistance training in the first week
is associated with substantial increment in strength without any
change in mass. It would be interesting in the future to verify
that the descriptor of MQ computed by this technique captures
the changes in the muscle over the first week that account for
the increase in strength.
We should also note that the MRI techniques used for our
analysis are sensitive to body composition, but do not provide
data on other contributors to MQ decline, such as denervation
and bioenergetic alterations, due to either mitochondrial dysfunction or metabolic changes.

812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented an MRI-based muscle and IMAT characterization model that utilizes information produced by tissue
quantification. Our central hypothesis is that we can use the
MRI-based MQ signatures to predict biomechanical properties
of the midthigh, namely the muscle quality index MQ. In our
method, we estimate statistical properties of [NS,FS,WS] MR
intensity distributions with emphasis on Gaussian mixture models of muscle and IMAT voxel intensities in the joint [FS,WS]
domain and the eigendecomposition of the covariance matrices.
To test our hypothesis, we validated the separation capability of
our technique against reference data produced by independent
clinical measures of muscle strength. Our technique produced
encouraging separation between low and high MQ subjects.
APPENDIX A
COMPLETE FEATURE DOMAIN
Feature Group
Areas

Area Fractions

Standardized
Intensities

Intensity
Distributions in
[FS,WS]
Domain

Intensity
Distributions in
Transformed
Domain

Acronyms
M-AA: Muscle Area Average
SAT-AA: Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Area Average
IMAT-AA: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Area Average
B-AA: Bone Area Average
SAT-AF: Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Area Fraction
M-AF: Muscle Area Fraction (scaled using M and IMAT)
M-AF2: Muscle Area Fraction (scaled using M, IMAT and SAT)
IMAT-AF: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Area Fraction
M-NS-SIA: Muscle Nonsuppressed Intensity Average
SAT-NS-SIA: Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Nonsuppressed Scaled
Intensity Average
IMAT-NS-SIA: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Nonsuppressed
Scaled Intensity Average
B-NS-SIA: Bone Nonsuppressed Scaled Intensity Average
M-FS-SIA: Muscle Fat-Suppressed Scaled Intensity Average
SAT-FS-SIA: Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Fat-Suppressed Scaled
Intensity Average
IMAT-FS-SIA: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Fat-Suppressed
Scaled Intensity Average
B-FS-SIA: Bone Fat-Suppressed Scaled Intensity Average
M-WS-SIA: Muscle Water-Suppressed Scaled Intensity Average
SAT-WS-SIA: Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Water-Suppressed
Scaled Intensity Average
IMAT-WS-SIA: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Water-Suppressed
Scaled Intensity Average
B-WS-SIA: Bone Water-Suppressed Scaled Intensity Average
M-FS-EMA: Muscle Fat-Suppressed E-M Average
M-WS-EMA: Muscle Water-Suppressed E-M Average
M-FSFS-COV: Muscle Fat-Suppressed-Fat-Suppressed Covariance
M-FSWS-COV: Muscle Fat-Suppressed-Water-Suppressed
Covariance
M-WSWS-COV: Muscle Water-Suppressed-Water-Suppressed
Covariance
IMAT-FS-EMA: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Fat-Suppressed E-M
Average
IMAT-WS-EMA: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Water-Suppressed
E-M Average
IMAT-FSFS-COV: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue
Fat-Suppressed-Fat-Suppressed Covariance
IMAT-FSWS-COV: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue
Fat-Suppressed-Water-Suppressed Covariance
IMAT-WSWS-COV: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue
Water-Suppressed-Water-Suppressed Covariance
M-CM-EVE11: Muscle Cov. Matrix EigenVector (1, 1)
M-CM-EVE12: Muscle Cov. Matrix EigenVector (1, 2)
M-CM-EVA1: Muscle Cov. Matrix EigenValue (1)
M-CM-EVA2: Muscle Cov. Matrix EigenValue (2)

M-CM-DET: Muscle Cov. Matrix Determinant
IMAT-CM-EVE11: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Cov. Matrix
EigenVector (1, 1)
IMAT-CM-EVE12: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Cov. Matrix
EigenVector (1, 2)
IMAT-CM-EVA1: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Cov. Matrix
EigenValue (1)
IMAT-CM-EVA2: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Cov. Matrix
EigenValue (2)
IMAT-CM-DET: Intermuscular Adipose Tissue Cov. Matrix
Determinant

REFERENCES
[1] B. H. Goodpaster et al., “Attenuation of skeletal muscle and strength
in the elderly: The health ABC study,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 90, no. 6,
pp. 2157–2165, Jun. 2001.
[2] A. Z. Moore et al., (2014, Feb.). Difference in muscle quality over the
adult life span and biological correlates in the Baltimore Longitudinal
Study of Aging. J. Amer. Geriatr. Soc. [Online]. 62(2), 230–236, Feb.
2014. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jgs.12653
[3] D. J. Foley et al., Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies of the
Elderly: Resource Data Book. Washington, DC, USA: NIH Publication,
86–2443, 1986.
[4] I. Janssen et al., “The healthcare costs of sarcopenia in the United States,”
J. Amer. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 80–85, Jan. 2004.
[5] N. A. Lynch et al., “Muscle quality. I. Age-associated differences between
arm and leg muscle groups,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 188–194,
Jan. 1999.
[6] B. H. Goodpaster et al., “The loss of skeletal muscle strength, mass, and
quality in older adults: The health, aging and body composition study,”
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 1059–1064, Oct.
2006.
[7] M. J. Delmonico et al., “Longitudinal study of muscle strength, quality, and adipose tissue infiltration,” Amer. J. Clin. Nutr., vol. 90, no. 6,
pp. 1579–1585, Dec. 2009.
[8] F. Schick et al., “MRI of muscular fat,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 47,
no. 4, pp. 720–727, Apr. 2002.
[9] V. Positano et al., (Mar., 2009). Accurate segmentation of subcutaneous and intermuscular adipose tissue from MR images of the
thigh. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging [Online]. 29 (3) 677–684. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmri.21699
[10] D. C. Karampinos et al., (2012, Apr.). Characterization of the regional
distribution of skeletal muscle adipose tissue in type 2 diabetes using
chemical shift-based water/fat separation. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging [Online]. 35(4), 899–907. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmri.23512
[11] S. Makrogiannis et al., (2012, May). Automated quantification of muscle and fat in the thigh from water-, fat-, and nonsuppressed MR images. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging [Online]. 35(5), 1152–1161. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmri.22842
[12] X. Y. Ruan et al., (2007, Feb.). Estimating whole body intermuscular adipose tissue from single cross-sectional magnetic resonance images. J. Appl. Physiol. [Online], 102(2), 748–754. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00304.2006
[13] T. Yoshizumi et al., “Abdominal fat: Standardized technique for measurement at CT,” Radiology, vol. 211, no. 1, pp. 283–286, Apr. 1999.
[14] N. Tustison et al., “N4ITK: Improved N3 bias correction,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1310–1320, Jun. 2010.
[15] M. Jenkinson et al., “Improved optimization for the robust and accurate
linear registration and motion correction of brain images,” Neuroimage,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 825–841, Oct. 2002.
[16] R. O. Duda et al., Pattern Classification. New York, NY, USA: WileyInterscience, 2000.
[17] C. Xu and J. L. Prince, “Snakes, shapes, and gradient vector flow,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 359–369, Mar. 1998.
[18] C. H. Q. Ding and H. Peng. (2005, Feb.). Minimum redundancy
feature selection from microarray gene expression data. J. Bioinformat. Comput. Biol. [Online]. 3(2), 185–206. Available: http://dblp.unitrier.de/db/journals/jbcb/jbcb3.html#DingP05
[19] C. J. C. Burges. (1998, Jun.). A tutorial on support vector machines for
pattern recognition. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. [Online]. 2(2) 121–167.
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1009715923555

MAKROGIANNIS et al.: IMAGE-BASED TISSUE DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL MUSCLE QUALITY CHARACTERIZATION

[20] N. W. Shock et al., (1984). Normal Human Aging: The Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging [Online]. Washington, DC, USA: NIH Publication.
Available: http://health-equity.pitt.edu/2557/
[21] D. Hernando et al., (2010, Sep.). Chemical shift-based water/fat separation: A comparison of signal models. Magn. Reson. Med. [Online]. 64(3)
811–822. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mrm.22455
[22] D. C. Karampinos et al., (2011, Nov.). “ T-corrected fat quantification
using chemical shift-based water/fat separation: Application to skeletal muscle,” Magn. Reson. Med. [Online]. 66(5), 1312–1326. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mrm.22925

813

[23] W. T. Triplett et al., (2014, Jul.). Chemical shift-based MRI to measure
fat fractions in dystrophic skeletal muscle. Magn. Reson. Med. [Online].
72(1), 8–19. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mrm.24917

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

