18

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

An NFC-Enabled CMOS IC for a Wireless Fully
Implantable Glucose Sensor
Andrew DeHennis, Member, IEEE, Stefan Getzlaff, David Grice, and Marko Mailand, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents an integrated circuit (IC) that
merges integrated optical and temperature transducers, optical interface circuitry, and a near-field communication (NFC)-enabled
digital, wireless readout for a fully passive implantable sensor
platform to measure glucose in people with diabetes. A flip-chip
mounted LED and monolithically integrated photodiodes serve as
the transduction front-end to enable fluorescence readout. A widerange programmable transimpedance amplifier adapts the sensor
signals to the input of an 11-bit analog-to-digital converter digitizing the measurements. Measurement readout is enabled by means
of wireless backscatter modulation to a remote NFC reader. The
system is able to resolve current levels of less than 10 pA with a
single fluorescent measurement energy consumption of less than
1 μJ. The wireless IC is fabricated in a 0.6-μm-CMOS process and
utilizes a 13.56-MHz-based ISO15693 for passive wireless readout
through a NFC interface. The IC is utilized as the core interface
to a fluorescent, glucose transducer to enable a fully implantable
sensor-based continuous glucose monitoring system.
Index Terms—Biomedical electronics, biomedical signal processing, biosensors, CMOS integrated circuits, diabetes, energy efficiency, fluorescence, implantable biomedical devices, optical sensors, remotely powered, system on chip.

I. INTRODUCTION
EMOTELY powered biological monitoring systems with
a small form factor that enable long-term implantation can
facilitate treatments for a variety of diseases and conditions. The
building in of the remote powering alleviates the need for an onsite battery, which has size and sensor lifetime benefits. Passive
monitoring is very applicable in systems that have a low read
rate and can be configured to be normally dormant and then excited for measurements. Passive telemetry has been around for
a number of years both for sensing and wireless identification,
and serves as the basis for near-field communication (NFC) that
is used in a number of applications. NFC technology is based
on similar technology used in radio frequency identification
(RFID) transponders. Such a device was first patented in 1973
[1] that included rewritable memory and the same year saw the
demonstration of a transponder that used modulated backscatter for communication [2]. Further developments included the
increase of range and carrier frequency and the number of applications expanded rapidly in the 1980s and 1990s from toll

R

Manuscript received March 6, 2015; revised July 23, 2015; accepted August
22, 2015. Date of publication September 11, 2015; date of current version
December 31, 2015.
A. DeHennis is with Senseonics, Inc., Germantown, MD 20876 USA (email:
Andy.Dehennis@senseonics.com).
S. Getzlaff, D. Grice, and M. Mailand are with ZMDI—Zentrum Mikroelektronik Dresden AG, 01109 Dresden, Germany (email: Stefan.Getzlaff@
zmdi.com; David.Grice@zmdi.com; Marko.Mailand@zmdi.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2475236

road polling to tracking and monitoring of animals. The 1990s
also saw an emergence of ISO standards for RFID, which enabled independent development of both tags and reader systems
that could conform to the same communication standard. Efforts
focused on communications at 13.56 MHz proved well suited
for small, implantable transponders in short-range applications
(<1m) with moderate telemetry data rates [3].
There has been a general effort to utilize NFC technology for
sensing applications in vivo [4]–[6] and, even more specifically,
in sensing glucose [6]–[9]. These efforts look to utilize the wireless interface and also provide a remote power source to energize
sensor systems. These systems can achieve power levels are directed at using enzymatic glucose indicators, which can lead
to achieving system current levels in the range of 50 μA. For
this system, since an abiotic fluorescent indicator is used, power
had to be delivered high enough to then power and activate
a light source with current on the order of milliamps. Lightemitting diodes (LEDs) provide the capability to emit discreet
wavelength illumination with low excitation power. The merging LED technology, integrated optical detection, and passive
telemetry were then the basis of this sensor development. Specific features of each of the circuit blocks were required for the
system to function via rectified voltage that is recovered from
a carrier field with bidirectional communication. Developments
were needed on:
1) system architecture to enable both standard NFC capability, such as reading and writing to on-site memory, as well
as measurement execution;
2) stabilizing the LED current source and power consumption loading fluctuations throughout a measurement;
3) enabling a transimpedance amplifier (TIA) with a wide
dynamic range for back end system programmability and
the ability to have analog ratiometric processing and compensation;
4) integration of other sensor interfaces, such as temperature,
along with diagnostic measurement for signal compensation and system stability monitoring;
5) an RF front-end for simultaneous voltage clamping and
load modulation;
6) an on-chip analog to digital converter (ADC) for digitization of the sensor signal prior to transmission.
The presented IC has been used as the core to a remotely powered wireless glucose sensor, which has been tested at the system
level as part of a continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) system
[10], [11]. Current commercially available CGM systems are
all battery powered and transdermal. Further enabling ease of
use and overall compliance with CGM can be achieved using
a fully implantable sensor-based system architecture [9]. The
CGM system consists of a normally dormant fully implantable

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DEHENNIS et al.: NFC-ENABLED CMOS IC FOR A WIRELESS FULLY IMPLANTABLE GLUCOSE SENSOR

19

the reader. The source of current for the flip-chip mounted LED
[7] comes from the unregulated rectified voltage Vsup , but the
sink current is controlled by the LED driver block. The digital
core of the chip ensures general compatibility with ISO15693
custom commands that enable the activation and readout of the
analog sensor interface circuitry. The only external support circuitry required is a tuned antenna circuit coupling to the reader
field, and a charge buffer capacitor at Vsup .
The individual block performance had some level of optimization for performance and power consumption; however,
tradeoffs were also made to focus on design for test and design
for manufacturing of the respective circuit blocks. To enable
this, mass-production-related aspects were considered and feature and tolerances were built in to allow for process variations,
assembly variations, and packaging differences from sensor to
sensor that could be compensated by a wafer-level test and trim
of the different modules [12].
A. Remote Powering and Digital NFC Interface

Fig. 1. Architecture of the NFC/sensor-system-on-chip (SoC) that enables remote powering, bidirectional data transfer, and a multisensor interface enabling
a wireless microfluorimeter system.

sensor, which is configured with the IC. This sensor is then
powered from an external transmitter, which is connected to a
smartphone app to enable real time glucose display. The paper
focuses on the integrated circuit functionality that enables the
functionality of the long term implant.
II. IC ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN
The NFC interface functionality was implemented such that
it could interface with interrogator systems that are ISO15693
compliant. For that, the additional measurement functionality
needed to add on capability without conflicting with the protocol. This was done by using an NFC/RF front-end that handled
the communication and powering and then only activated the
measurement sequences when measurement commands were
issued. Fig. 1 shows the top-level block diagram for the IC and
illustrates the two layers for the remote powering in the NFC
RF front-end and the NFC controller that handle the wireless
communication. The measurement control and state machine
is only called when a measurement command is issued to the
sensor. Use of the ISO15693 has benefits for longer telemetry
read ranges than other 13.56-MHz standards and enables multisupplier standard-device availability as it is currently supported
with mobile operating systems. The analog NFC RF front-end
module provides power and data recovery from the RF field originating from an ISO15693-compatible reader. The implemented
circuitry that enables this functionality includes: a 13.56-MHz
clock recovery, 100-kHz data demodulator (comparable to the
solution in [6]), 2.85-V regulator for the analog-interface supply, 1.5-V regulator for the digital supply, and an impedance
loading circuit to provide the backscatter modulated signal to

The main blocks needed to implement the ISO15693 functionality are a one-out-of-four decoder, Manchester encoder,
data serializer and deserializer, command decode, error handling, and then the digital-to-analog interface for measurement
controlling. There is also a 26×16-bit EEPROM integrated for
storage of sensor’s unique identification number, traceability
data (unique device identification needed throughout the supply
chain and in the field), and configuration parameters. Configuration parameters are trim and setup values for the analog sensor
interface and calibration coefficients from previous measurement results (used by exchangeable readers for glucose calculation). Calibration coefficients must be cyclically adjusted and
updated (dependent on the changing sensor chemistry characteristics, e.g., due to photobleaching [8]), respectively, in order
to maintain long-term glucose-measurement accuracy.
B. Measurement and Sensing Capabilities
The analog sensor interface circuitry supports multiple types
of measurements including: RF input power, temperature,
and current measurements from either of the two integrated
photodiodes (n-well detectors) or two externally connected
photodiodes. The analog signals are then digitized with an
11-bit, ΣΔ-modulator-based, charge-balancing ADC. Among
other features, effective resolutions of at least 10 pA for the
photodiode currents and 0.05 K (per digital output count) are required, in order to achieve a final glucose resolution of less than
1 mg/dL [9].
C. Measurement Sequencing and Control
The measurement control unit is designed such that it can
run up to eight different sensor measurements within a single
measurement sequence/cycle. The starting time slot, the measurement type, and the time slots for switching the LED ON and
OFF must be programmed to the on-chip nonvolatile memory.
After a short setup time for ISO command decoding, the first
measurement field strength is set up and conducted. The result is

20

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Digital-to-analog interface measurement sequencing—example for
programmable measurement cycle: time slot fractioning, allocation of LED on
time, and eight separate measurements.

stored in a register, similar to the remaining results of the measurement cycle, to be encoded and transmitted via NFC. Fig. 2
shows an example of a free-configured measurement cycle.
The multiple measurement cycle is separated into 31 time
slots of 604 μs each. This is twice the 302-μs frame response
waiting time [13]. The IC starts its backscatter response directly
after completion of the last measurement. Hence, no time and
thus no energy are wasted. The measurement cycle must be
scheduled such that the last measurement will be completed
at the expiration of the last time slot. Otherwise, the IC will
not respond within the 20-ms time frame. This would lead to
a “No Transponder” time-out event by the ISO15693 reader. A
full measurement sequence to enable temperature-compensated
fluorescent transduction includes measurements of both photodiodes when the LED is ON and OFF as well as a temperature
sensor measurement.
III. ANALOG RF AND SENSOR INTERFACE CIRCUITRY
The analog RF and the sensor interface circuitry of the ASIC
enable the remote powering and the transduction for the system.
The remote powering has to balance voltage recovery, overvoltage protection, and enable data communication via backscatter telemetry. The analog sensor interface circuitry provides
the direct readout for the optical system and supporting measurements needed for fluorescent transduction and temperature
compensation.
A. NFC Front-End
The voltage at the coil pads must be limited in order to protect the IC’s internal circuitry. A clamp connected in parallel
to the antenna-coil input pads realizes this voltage limitation
(see Fig. 3). It limits the input voltage to <7 V and any excessive power is dissipated. Moreover, the clamp circuit creates
the backscatter load modulation [14]. Consequently, the clamp
threshold is intentionally reduced if the magnetic field needs to
be attenuated in order to cause a respective modulation pulse.
1) Clamp Circuit: As shown in Fig. 3, the clamp, based on
the Z Diode B transistors, is connected in parallel with the main
full-wave rectifier that generates the IC’s main supply voltage,

Fig. 3. ISO front-end architecture with clamp circuitry defined by Z-Diode B
and field strength measurement.

Vsup , and supplies all blocks with the rectified voltage. It is
powered by a separate half-wave PMOS rectifier.
The current at pin Iﬁeld is used for field strength measurements, with a magnetic field input range of 0.1–5 mA/m, as
specified for ISO15693.
A half-wave rectifier supplies power to derive the unfiltered
coil amplitude signal. The power supply voltage, Vsup , from the
full-wave rectifier is buffered on capacitor connected to GND
(cp., Fig. 1). Hence, the coil voltage signal is low-pass filtered
at Vsup and cannot be used for the voltage regulation. In case
of high field currents, the coil voltage exceeds a certain voltage
level and the power supply voltage Vdd increases accordingly.
A current will start flowing through transistor T9, if the voltage
drop across Z-Diode B and R3 is high enough. The voltage
across resistor R4 increases and current is drawn from Coil1
and Coil2 to GND via the transistors T10 and T11. Finally,
the voltage Vsup is limited and regulated to a voltage level of
approximately 7 V, which is defined by Z-Diode B (cp., Fig. 3,
modulation OFF).
The information about the field strength is derived from two
sources: the clamp voltage level Vdd and the current value
through T10 and T11. At low field currents, only the Z-Diode
A (not yet Z-Diode B) is conducting. The current is mirrored
via T1, T4, T12, and T13. The resulting current Iﬁeld depends
on voltage Vdd that follows the input field strength and power,
respectively. In case of higher field currents, Z-Diode B starts
conducting and current is drawn from Coil1 and Coil2 via T10
and T11. Transistor T14 mirrors a portion of this current and
adds it to Iﬁeld . The current through T13 stays almost constant
in that mode since Vdd is regulated/limited to a constant value.
The back modulation signal, modon , is applied to transistor
T17. A current, defined by R1 and T15, is mirrored by T16 and
added to R4. An increased voltage over R4 leads to a higher
current through T10 and T11 that leads to reduced voltage via
the coil (cp., Fig. 3, modulation ON).
On the one hand, the passive telemetry communication is
enabled without disturbing the rectified voltage by means of the
voltage clamping circuitry, changing its overall current pull to
reflect the load to the carrier. On the other hand, we designed
controlled ON/OFF schemes, LED and other load switching
in such a way that no steep transitions on Vsup occur to avoid

DEHENNIS et al.: NFC-ENABLED CMOS IC FOR A WIRELESS FULLY IMPLANTABLE GLUCOSE SENSOR

Fig. 4. Oscilloscope measurement of the LED transition effect on (a) V su p
and (b) backscatter modulation test results with LED ON. Top to bottom: coil
voltage V su p , test signal for load modulation at sensor IC, demodulated output
at reader.

erroneous backscatter modulation [14]. The latter would prevent
ISO-standard compliant communication.
2) Measurement Results: The related slew rate control of the
LED “ON” state, which is controlled by a 3-bit programmable
LED-driver, and the resulting slow response effect on the unregulated supply voltage Vsup is shown in Fig. 4(a). Correct recognition by the reader’s demodulator (ISO15693 communication
host) of the modulation pulses was tested under full analog frontend operation (measurements with LED, 1mA, switched ON).
As shown in Fig. 4(b) across a 2-cm read range, the respective
backscatter modulation was detectable by a standard ISO15693
reader (FEIG: OBIDTM ID.ISC.LR), with an effective modulation depth of ca. 32%. Up to 50% modulation can be realized
by the front-end, dependent on the coil coupling. The optimized
low rate of change, load switching of the LED, and other analog
sensor front-end circuitry guarantees spectral components remain far beyond the passband for ISO15693 communication. In
comparison to state-of-the-art rectifiers (incl. overvoltage protection) like those in [15] and [16], we achieved a competitive,
measured power conversion efficiency of 72% with a required
silicon area for the clamp-rectifier blocks of 0.12 mm2 . This
leads to a figure-of-merit (FOMrect = PCE
area ) for the clamprectifier blocks of 600%/mm2 , whereas known, silicon-proven
FOMrect values for 13.56-MHz recitifiers are in the range of
66.2%/mm2 [15] to 445%/mm2 [16].
B. Transimpedance Amplifier
A TIA is integrated in order to convert the small single-ended
output currents of the photodiode into processible differential
voltages. Moreover, special analog signal processing is integrated for an optimum exploitation of the TIA output and ADC
input dynamic range, respectively. In general signal integration
for the optical sensing path had to be applied as soon as possible, resulting in a topology with intrinsic improved distortion
immunity (in the IC’s schematic and layout) against spurious
effects, e.g., caused by magnetic fields present during the NFC
operation.
1) TIA Topology and Measurement Results: The TIA topology is shown in Fig. 5. Its input current iin is translated into
two currents of equal magnitude i+ and i− by means of a high
impedance current mirror stage.

Fig. 5.

21

TIA topology.

Fig. 6. Signal characteristics and interrelationship for the proposed subtraction
principle.

The control loop with the operational transconductance amplifier (OTA) ensures that the drain voltages of the current mirrors are equal, resulting in a reduced error of the current mirror
factor m. The OTA ensures that influences of output PMOS resistances are reduced. The transistors in the current mirror have
been sized such that remaining mismatch effects: PMOS-toPMOS, NMOS-to-NMOS, or between PMOS path and NMOS
path (cp., Fig. 6) are small enough over process variation and
can be compensated by means of calibration and trimming as
described below. The signal switches are controlled digitally
with the signal pon . Here, the on-duration with pon = 1 determines the integration time tint for charging Cint . This translates
directly into the TIA gain and transimpedance, respectively:
kTIA =

vout
m
= tint ·
.
iin
Cint

(1)

However, the main operation of the TIA, with one integration
period and constant signals i+ and i− , is just the I–V conversion
and amplification of one of several individual current signals:
photocurrent 1 (signal), photocurrent 2 (reference), current output from the clamp circuit representing the input RF field power
(Iﬁeld ), LED-voltage proportional current, or fixed or open input
for diagnostic purposes.

22

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

The parameters m, Cint , and tint can be programmed to set
up a respective gain. Further, tint can be trimmed during manufacturing test in which a known, fixed current is applied to
the input and the integration time is digitally adjusted with
tint = tint0 ± ttrim to obtain an optimum gain factor kTIA . Selected gain and trim setup are stored in the on-chip EEPROM.
After trimming, a gain accuracy of 3σ ∼ 0.8% for the highest
programmable trans-impedance of 250mV/nA was achieved on
wafer-level production testing of 1900 ICs. The gain accuracy
is needed in order to exploit the analog sensing and signal processing capabilities optimally, e.g., to determine a highly precise
value of the effective photodiode current. The TIA gain is programmable from 2 up to 250 mV/nA to process currents with
dynamic ranges from 10 to 1250 nA.
2) Signal Subtraction: Further, a special subtraction operation has been developed [17] to maximize the overall system’s
resolution for current signals. In this case, the cross-switch is
controlled by the signal sub. The input relation for the integrator’s positive and negative input can be swapped to be i+ and i− ,
respectively or vice versa. In consequence, it is possible to, e.g.,
charge Cint based on a first TIA input current iin,r (duration tir ),
switch OFF the input current and change to another TIA input
signal (switching duration tset,sub ), interchange the integrator
inputs referred to i+ and i− , or discharge Cint based on a first
TIA input current iin,s (duration tis ), which finally leads to an
output voltage being proportional to the difference of the input
currents determined by
iin,s = iin,r + Δi and vc (t) = iin

m
· tint .
Cint

Fig. 7.

PTAT sensor with signal offset shift.

Fig. 8.

Temperature transfer characteristic.

(2)

This method is used only for a single subtraction of the signal
and reference current in the presented system in order to match
the TIA output range for the signal difference to the ADC input that leads to an maximum signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and
energy-per-bit efficiency for the signal difference Δi. A detailed
description of this approach can be found in [17].

with IC 1 n = IC 2 leading to
VPTAT =

k
RT 4
T·
(1 + n) · ln n.
e0
RT 3


(5)

VT

C. Temperature Sensor Interface Circuit
A proportional to ambient temperature (PTAT)-based topology has been designed that generates an output voltage proportional to the absolute temperature. The application’s temperature range is 15–45 °C as the IC will be implanted and
the human body. The temperature will not go below or beyond
these limits. A simplified block diagram is shown in Fig. 7. The
temperature sensing element is a bipolar transistor pair. The
base-emitter
to absolute temperature
 voltage is complementary

T: VB E ∝ VT = ek0 · T . The PTAT-sensor exploits the general temperature dependence of basic bandgap circuit [18]. The
voltage over RT 3 is
ΔVB E = VB E 2 − VB E 1 = VT · ln

IC 2
.
IC 1

(3)

The temperature sensing signal can be derived as
VPTAT = RT 4 (IC 1 + IC 2 ) = RT 4

ΔVB E
· (1 + n)
RT 3

(4)

Here, k is the Boltzmann constant, e0 is the elementary charge,
and IC 1 and IC 2 are, respectively, the currents through RT 1
and RT 2 in Fig. 7. The respective (unamplified) sensitivity is
1.8 mV/K.
The PTAT provides a very linear temperature characteristic
(see Fig. 8). The linearity error of the signal path, including
temperature sensor interface circuit and ADC (compared to an
ideal straight line) is less than 0.1 K. Further, the p-n-junctionbased sensor signal generation is much less sensitive to physical
stress compared to, e.g., resistive-bridge-type temperature sensors. This is relevant because the bump-connection assembly
with the ferrite antenna will cause quantitatively unpredictable
strain/stress to the dice that could hamper proper temperature
sensing operation.
There is a large inherent temperature offset due to the presence
of a PTAT element over the application range 15–45 °C, which
is the human-body temperature range of the subcutaneous tissue
into which the fluorimeter will be implanted. The signal offset
in VPTAT at 30 °C referred to a potentially symmetric differential output is ca. 545 mV at the output of the bandgap circuit.

DEHENNIS et al.: NFC-ENABLED CMOS IC FOR A WIRELESS FULLY IMPLANTABLE GLUCOSE SENSOR

23

A 6-bit programmable offset shift circuit is integrated that reduces the effective output voltage VPTAT by a scaled version of
VREF from the same bandgap circuit. Each IC is, respectively,
trimmed during the manufacturing test on wafer level at 37 °C.
Additionally, a self-diagnostic temperature sensor measurement
with settable offset trim-code (temperature sensor, ADC-input
buffer, reference, ADC) can be conducted that allows to check
for temperature amplifier issues, aging effects/drifts of offset
compensating trim circuit, or general operation errors of all
involved blocks (especially while being implanted).
The resulting absolute accuracy (±3 sigma) is ±0.28 K over
the entire temperature range, i.e., 99.7% of all temperature measurements from 15 to 45 °C have an absolute error (deviations
due to nonlinearity and noise) of less than 0.28 K referred to
the calibration temperature (obtained in a temperature chamber
using a calibrated reference thermometer).
Fig. 9.

D. Analog-to-Digital Converter
The presented system contains several different sensing elements and signal sources that need to be digitized. The effective
on-time for the whole analog interface is tightly limited by the
maximum NFC response time and the available energy from the
inductive link. On the other hand, the short-term DC sensor signals must be digitized with a maximum SNR. In consequence,
the used ADC must fulfill the following constraints:
1) configurability for conversion time versus noise reduction,
dependent on the SNR of the sensor input (output with a
signal-to-noise-and-distortion ratio (SINAD) of >60 dB,
i.e., an effective number of bits (ENOB) of more than
9.5 Bit);
2) one-shot operation: switch ON, convert, switch OFF (no
continuous operation) in order to minimize energy consumption, providing 1 conversion within Ts < 0.5 ms;
3) robustness against clock inaccuracy and jitter, insensitivity against spurious effects;
4) programmability to adapt to the individual sensor signal
dynamic ranges;
5) low power consumption (<600 μW), leading to
a figure-of-merit, FOMADC = Ts · Power/(2ENOB ) ≤
414 pJ/step.
The selected two-stage ADC architecture is based on the
speed-improved robust topology in [19] based on the fundamental charge-balancing concept [20] using a ΣΔ-modulator.
Although alternative ADCs using incremental ΣΔ-modulators
are known to achieve smaller FOMADC values, state-of-theart implementations show that they require large chip area and
consume either too much absolute power or cannot provide sufficient sampling rates [21], [22]. Further, our proposed ADC
has been used in previous nonpublished automotive-sensing
products fulfilling challenging electromagnetic compatibility
requirements (cp., standards: ISO11451 and ISO11452), which
we consider as also highly relevant for an implantable electronic
device.
1) Charge-Balancing Concept: In our implementation, the
division of the complete analog-to-digital conversion using two
coupled stages leads to a coarse MSB conversion followed by a

Topology of two-stage charge-balancing ADCs (one rail).

fine LSB conversion. As detailed in [19], the charge-balancing
ADC is integrated as a fully differential circuit in order to reduce
spurious circuit effects and to exploit the potentially increased
differential signal dynamic. Thus, half of the overall available
input dynamic range of the ADC is used for (digitally programmable) signal offset compensation of the respective sensor
input signal. The underlying ADC topology is shown in Fig. 9.
The conventional charge-balancing conversion is carried out
by transferring a positive charge Qp = C1E Z R Vref and a negative charge Qn = −C1E Z R Vin , where Vin is the input voltage
and Vref is the reference voltage [19], assuming C1E , C1Z ,
C1R would be merged into a single capacitance C1E Z R , and
the switches s11 , s12 , s13 and s21 , s22 , s23 into s1 and s2 ,
respectively.
The conversion sequence of the implemented two-stage ADC
starts with a reset of both integrators by means of closed
switches s3 and s7 . In a second step, the “positive” charge
Qp = C1R Vref is fed to C1i with respective settings of the
switches s11 to s4 . The first integrator’s output voltage, Vm sb
changes accordingly. Whenever this integrator output voltage is
negative and undershoots analog ground (AGND), the comparator generates a pulse. In case Vm sb is positive, the charge Qn =
−C1E Vin + C1Z Vref is fed to C1i . Vice versa, if Vm sb is negative
the charge Qp is fed to C1i . With Nm sb bits for the coarse conversion the complete, transferred charge to C1i is linear, dependent
on the difference of Zm sb Vref C1R − 2N m s b Vin C1E , where Zm sb
is the coarse conversion’s data. Subsequently, the residual output

voltage of the coarse conversion V m sb = −Qtr 1 /C1i = Vin,lsb
is input for the fine conversion with a resolution of Nlsb bits. In
general, it holds for a single ADC stage that, at the first stage of
Fig. 9:
yields

2N m s b (Vin C1E − Vref C1Z ) = Zm sb Vref C1R →

Vin C1E
C1Z
Zm sb
=
·
−
.
2N m s b
Vref C1R
C1R

(6)

Thus, the ADC result is the relation of the comparator’s
counter pulses and the number of clock cycles, and the inherent
ADC stage’s amplification can be controlled by the capacitance

24

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 10. Integrator output voltages (fully differential implementation), respective clock, and counter pulses.

ratio C1E /C1R , and the ratio C1Z /C1R allows for shifting the
effective signal range of Vin referred to Vref and AGND. At the
fine conversion, the same principles are applied. The final ADC
result can be described by
Zcount = (Zm sb − 1) 2N l s b −1 + (Zlsb − 1) .

(7)

For accurate ratios and optimum operation, the matching of
CE , CR and CZ to Ci is evident. Here, we improve the known
charge-balancing implementations by means of reusing circuit
parts of the switched capacitor input network (C1E , C1R , C1Z ,
s11 , s12 , s13 and s21 , s22 , s23 ) to assemble the topological
input network for the second stage (C2E Z R , s4 , s5 , s6 ) in order
to consume less area and reduce overall mismatch effects. With
the differential implementation, the respective input stages were
designed such that the ADC’s input voltages are symmetrical
to the switch-ground in order to increase the common mode
rejection and avoid unwanted amplifier common mode loop
influences.
2) Operating Principle: The integrated ADC has been designed with programmable Nm sb /Nlsb segmentations, i.e.,
Nm sb /Nlsb ∈ {7/4; 8/3; 9/2; 10/1; 11/0} for 11-bit resolution
with the capability to process differential signal dynamics containing zero up to almost 50% offset. In general, the rule of
thumb holds: the higher the MSB resolution, the bigger the SNR
of the output, but the higher also the ADC’s energy consumption
due to the longer conversion. The respective reference voltage
is Vref ∼ 2.4V, and the basis clock frequency is 1.13 MHz. One
count equals ca. 1.17 mV.
Fig. 10 shows an exemplary dynamic operation of the integrated two-stage charge balancing ADC in fully differential
implementation (setup: Nm sb /Nlsb = 4/4). First, a charge proportional to the reference voltage is fed to C1i and can be observed at the first integrator’s output: Vm sb = Vm sb p − Vm sb l .
Subsequently, charge packets proportional to Vin change the
output voltage at each clock until the comparator threshold is
under-run, leading to a counter pulse from the comparator. This
is repeated for the first 2N m s b = 16 clocks. Then, the remaining
charge on C1i is processed by the second ADC stage. In the
example, the capacitor ratios CC 11 ER < CC 22 ER lead to different amplification of the reference and input voltage. The connected

Fig. 11. Measurement sequence (optical channel), dark current/diagnostic-1
comparison (MSB/LSB = 8/3).

control logic determines the ADC result based on Zcount and
the corresponding clock cycles on fclk .
3) Measurement Results: The noise performance of the ADC
processing signals from the optical channel (photodiode, TIA,
ADC) is shown in Fig. 11. ADC results of <256 counts for the
optical channel represent respective signals’ absolute system
offsets and are not relevant for the glucose measurement performance. With a typical mean noise value of ca. 1 count (3-sigma),
estimating the effective peak-to-peak (P2P) noise with 5-sigma
∼ 1.6 counts, i.e., Vnoise,P2P = 1.6 · 1.17 mV = 1.87 mV, the
ENOB can be determined as

	

	
Vin,m ax
Vref
ENOB = log2
= log2
Vnoise,P2P
Vnoise,P2P
= 10.3 bit.

(8)

The respectively dominant noise sources are the bandgap
reference voltage source for the ADC and the differential
integrator of the TIA. With a measured ADC power consumption of 513 μW and an effective Ts,m in = 141 μs, the
implemented ADC with TIA preamplification achieves an
FOM of FOMADC = 57.4 pJ/step. Incremental ΣΔ-ADCs being comparable in terms of requirements (like SINAD, sampling rate, etc.) and application are reported for 0.15–0.6-μm
CMOS processes with values in the same range, FOMADC ∈
{14.7, 76.3} pJ/step; cp., [22].
IV. IMPLANTABLE GLUCOSE SENSOR
The IC is fabricated in a custom double-poly, 3-metal,
0.6-μm mixed-signal process at XFAB. The process provides
1.2- and 2.4-V core devices, which we used for digital and
analog implementation, respectively, and a special option for
12-V devices required for the EEPROM and the NFC front-end.
Fig. 12 shows a die photo including the allocation of the main
IC blocks. The main properties and IC-performance parameters
are summarized in Table I.
The main operation of the sensor is to execute a full measurement operation including turning the LED on for a duration of
∼6 ms and sampling both photodetectors. For this, a power of
250 μW is fully sufficient for communication only, whereas the

DEHENNIS et al.: NFC-ENABLED CMOS IC FOR A WIRELESS FULLY IMPLANTABLE GLUCOSE SENSOR

Fig. 12. Die photograph showing the integrated photodiode and LED mounting points as well as the supporting circuitry.

TABLE I
SENSING CAPABILITIES OF THE IC
Measurement

Dynamic Range

Sensitivity

Photo diode current
Temperature
Field Strength
LED Bias’ Voltage
External Voltage
Diagnostic-1 (optical channel)
Diagnostic-2 (temperature)

1.16 μA
15–50 °C
140 mW
1.6 V
–1.5 to +1.5 V
1.16 μA
35 K

4.5 pA/count
18 mV/count
10 μW/count
1 mV/count
1.2 mV/count
4.5 pA/count
18 mK/count

Fig. 13. Two-channel encased microfluorimeter sensor measuring 3.3 mm
diameter × 15.7 mm length configured for subcutaneous glucose sensing.

full measurement (incl. LED switched-on) requires ca. 3.35 mW,
dominated by the LED power of 1.75 mW; cp., Table I.
The ASIC has been built into a sensing system for subcutaneous insertions and continuous communication with an external NFC-based transmitter system to enable a continuous
glucose monitor [10]. The implant that incorporates the remotely powered sensor is approximately 3.3 mm in diameter
and 13.7 mm in length, shown in Fig. 13.
The sensor consists of the integrated IC, a flip-chip mounted
LED, surface mount capacitors for tuning and rectification, and
a thick-film printed antenna fabricated on a NiZn-based ferrite
substrate. This ferrite substrate antenna enables an increase in
the coupling coefficient between the sensor and the inductively
coupled externally worn transceiver system [23]. The integrated
IC is flip-chip mounted to the ferrite substrate using thermosonic
bonding [24], [25]. The sensor’s electronics are encased in a
rigid, translucent and biocompatible polymer capsule. This cap-

25

Fig. 14. Optical configuration of the integrated microfluorimeter system
showing the mounting of the LED and its direct interface to the glucose-sensitive
hydrogel on the outside of the encasement.

sule enables biocompatibility as well as full isolation of the electronics from the harsh subcutaneous environment. The sensor
is coated with a fluorescent glucose-sensing hydrogel to enable
the glucose transduction [26]. The optical system is comprised
of a 380-nm UV LED, which serves as the excitation source
for the fluorescent hydrogel, and two spectrally filtered photodiodes, which measure fluorescence intensity from the hydrogel
and the LED. The configuration of the optical system is shown
in Fig. 14.
Using dichroic spectral filters, the sensor optical system enables a reference measurement of backscattered LED light.
The signal channel filter blocks the LED spectrum to minimize the overall baseline [26]. The sensor detects glucose via
a nonenzymatic abiotic methodology; specifically, a stable fluorescent indicator molecule with a bis-boronate glucose recognition structure is polymerized onto the surface of the sensor,
and this indicator directly and reversibly interacts with glucose. The glucose is not consumed, and no additional cofactors
are required during this reversible complexation process. On
power-up, the LED source is energized for approximately 5 ms
to excite the fluorescent indicator. Between readings, the sensor remains electrically dormant and fully powered down. The
resultant glucose-proportional fluorescent emission pulse is detected through the pair of bandpass filtered photodiodes and
electronically encoded through the ISO15693 protocol. These
measurements are converted into glucose values using chemical
kinetics that model the various noise sources and degradation
mechanisms described in [27].
This sensing system is enabling clinical testing to characterize its long-term accuracy and performance in vivo. The system
is composed of the implantable sensor, a wearable transmitter,
which has the capability to telemeter information to various secondary display and alert modules. The system is being developed
both for clinical feedback of glucose measurements that are approaching hypo- and hyper glycemic levels as well as accuracy
levels to better manage their therapeutic regimens [28].
This sensor ASIC has been developed for volume production and thus required that each IC block and system feature be robust, producible, and testable with a high (preferable
process-independent) yield and provides a high degree of programmability for potential future product revisions of the glucose monitoring sensor product. The main goal has been to

26

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE MEASURED PERFORMANCE OF THE SENSORS SYSTEM AND ASIC CHARACTERIZATION
ASIC Die Specification
Die Size
Photodiode Size
Process
Operating Temperature

RF front-end and Interface Circuitry

1.65 mm × 6.05 mm
0.96 mm × 1.55 mm
custom 0.6-μm CMOS
15–45 °C

min. Operating Power
min. Magnetic Field
AM Modulation Depth
max. A2D-Resolution

Transducer Specification
Estimated Dark current
Temperature sensitivity
Prog. Excitation Current
Photosensitivities

21 pA
0.05 K/count
0.1–2 mA
380 nm:0.19 A/W,400–500 nm:0.3 A/W

250 μW
0.15 A/m rms
10–100%
ENOB ∼ 10.3 bit

max. ADC Sampling Rate

7.1 kHz

Current Input Sensitivity
max. Input Current Range
min. ADC conversion Time
typ. Operating Voltage

4.5 pA/count
1.15 μA
141 μs
2.85 V

develop an ASIC in which all blocks interoperate stably and
reliably in order to constitute a field-applicable sensor.
V. CLINICAL APPLICATION TO CGM
Based upon the measured performance of the ASIC as tabulated in Table II, the ASIC has been configured for fluorescent
within a system that is enabling clinical feasibility testing for
a CGM system. Current testing of the system has the fluorescent sensor inserted subcutaneously in the upper arm, which is
queried by a wearable transmitter. The wearable transmitter is
programmed to wake up the sensor via the NFC front-end, send
commands that enable measurement through glucose sensitive
fluorophore and then enable display of the calculated glucose
value. The transmitter’s interrogation system is built into a flatpanel ferrite antenna system near the skin side of the case [29].
Though the read range in less than 2.5 cm, it is enough to provide a continuous transdermal telemetry link with a transmitter
that can be removed and recharged throughout the life of the
implant.
The external reader also contains digital storage media that
enables extended profile information to be retrieved, downloaded to a computer or other electronic device, and reviewed by
the physician or subject. The use of the ISO15693 compatible
interface also enables the use of a commercial interface chip to
communicate to the integrated sensor. In initial clinical evaluation, accuracy study sessions assess point accuracy as well as
ability of the sensor to produce rate of change information to the
subject. The sensor’s performance during a glycemic challenge
[28] to study in-vivo accuracy is shown in Fig. 15, in which the
sensor is able to compensate well for the physiologic lag [30] to
maintain clinically accurate glucose levels. This system seeks to
enable continuous glycemic information to the subject and their
clinicians [31]. As shown in the transients, sensors have shown
functionality for long term insertion periods. For an accuracy
assessment, reference glucose measurements are taken every
15 min for comparison using a YSI 2300 STAT Plus benchtop
glucose analyzer. This ASIC has also served as the basis for
more expansive system developmental testing, which had insertion durations of up to 90 days [10], [11]. This systems use as
a CGM system has benefits in long term use for 90 days over
commercially available system that only last seven to ten days.
This long-term use is enabled both by the stability of the abiotic

Fig. 15. In-vivo glucose challenge and clinical read session correlation plots
showing the clinical performance of the microfluorimeter and glucose indicator
system when interfaced through the wireless link.

fluorescent indicator [11] and the remote powered architecture
of the implantable sensor.
VI. CONCLUSION
This technology for optical sensing, digital measurement sequencing and multiplexing, and remote powering presented in
this paper have been used as an enabling technology in achieving
long-term implantable glucose sensing. The presented wireless
sensor IC allows for high-precision wireless fluorimetery measurements that can be remotely powered and communicated
through an NFC front-end requiring a minimum operating input
power as low as 250 μW. This capability, along with temperature
sensing and internal self-diagnostics, has been used to develop
a small implantable multichip module to enable a new level of
remotely powered and controlled in-vivo sensing. With the use
of remote power, a long-term continuous glucose sensor lasting
for months in people with diabetes has been realized for the first
time. The wireless performance of the IC has been characterized
in vitro for resolutions of less than 0.1 K and 10 pA for the temperature and photodiode current measurements, respectively, by
means of an optimally adjusted ADC with ENOB ∼ 10.3 bit.

DEHENNIS et al.: NFC-ENABLED CMOS IC FOR A WIRELESS FULLY IMPLANTABLE GLUCOSE SENSOR

The full sensor system is currently in human feasibility testing
to characterize the in-vivo clinical performance.
REFERENCES
[1] M. W. Cardullo, “Transponder apparatus and system,” U.S. Patent 3 713
148, Jan. 23, 1973.
[2] J. Landt, Shrouds of Time: The History of RFID, Pittsburg, PA, USA: AIM
Inc., Oct. 1, 2001.
[3] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in
Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency Identification and Near-Field
Communication. Chichester, West Sussex, U.K.: Wiley, 2010.
[4] E. Strommer, J. Kaartinen, J. Parkka, A. Ylisaukko-oja, and I. Korhonen,
“Application of near field communication for health monitoring in daily
life,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Annu. Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., pp. 3246–3249,
2006.
[5] H. Zhang and J. Li, “NFC in medical applications with wireless sensors,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Electr. Control Eng., Yichang, China, pp. 718–721,
2011.
[6] K. Yamashita, S. Izumi, M. Nakano, T. Fujii, T. Konishi, H. Kawaguchi, H.
Kimura, K. Marumoto, T. Fuchikami, Y. Fujimori, H. Nakajima, T. Shiga,
and M. Yoshimoto, “A 38 μA wearable biosignal monitoring system with
near field communication,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. New Circuits Syst.
Conf., Paris, France, pp. 1–4, 2013.
[7] Z. Xiao, X. Tan, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Huang, P. Zhang, L.
Zheng, and H. Min, “An implantable RFID sensor tag toward continuous
glucose monitoring,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp.
910–919, May 2015.
[8] H. Yao, A. J. Shum, M. Cowan, I. Lahdasmaki, and B. A. Parviz, “A
contact lens with embedded sensor for monitoring tear glucose level,”
Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 3290–3296, 2010.
[9] M. Ahmadi and G. A. Jullien, “A wireless-implantable microsystem for
continuous blood glucose monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 169–180, Jun. 2009.
[10] X. Wang, S. Ioacara, and A. DeHennis, “Long-term home study on nocturnal hypoglycemic alarms using a new fully implantable continuous
glucose monitoring system in type 1 diabetes,” Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 17, no. 10, 2015.
[11] M. Mortellaro and A. DeHennis, “Performance characterization of an
abiotic and fluorescent-based continuous glucose monitoring system in
patients with type 1 diabetes,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 61, pp. 227–
231, 2014.
[12] C. Wegener and H. M. von Staudt, “Conquering variability in mixedsignal ICs,” in Proc. 9th Ph.D. Res. Microelectron. Electron., pp. 23–24,
Jun. 24–27, 2013.
[13] Identification Card—Contactless Integrated Circuit(s) Cards—Vicinity
Cards, ISO/IEC Standard 15693–2, 2006.
[14] M. Mailand, S. Getzlaff, and A. Dehennis, “A system–proof–of–concept
for remote measurement applications,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf.
Electronics Circuits Syst., Seville, Spain, 2012.
[15] J. Yoo, L. Yan, S. Lee, Y. Kim, and H. Yoo, “A 5.2 mW self-configured
wearable body sensor network controller and a 12 μW 54.9% efficiency
wirelessly powered sensor for continuous health monitoring systems,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, pp. 178–188, Jan. 2010.
[16] H.-M. Lee and M. Ghovanloo, “An integrated power-efficient active rectifier with offset-controlled high speed comparators for inductively powered
applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 8, pp.
1749–1760, Aug. 2011.
[17] M. Mailand and S. Getzlaff, “A transimpedance-amplifier-based subtraction principle for optimum signal resolution in mixed-signal current sensor
systems,” presented at the 9th IEEE Conf. New Circuits Syst., Bordeaux,
France, 2011.
[18] X. Dia, D. J. Chen, and R. L. Geiger, “Explicit characterization of bandgap
references,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Systems, Kos,
Greece, 2006, p. 576.
[19] K. Tsukamoto, T. Miyata, and T. Takagi, “A cyclic charge-balancing
A/D converter with capacitor mismatch error compensation,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 35–38, Feb. 1993.
[20] G. F. Landsburg, “A charge-balancing monolithic A/D converter,” IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 662–673, Dec. 1977.
[21] A. Agah, K. Vleugels, P. Griffin, M. Ronaghi, T. Plummer, and B. Wooley,
“A high-resolution low-power incremental ΣΔ ADC with extended range
for biosensor arrays,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1099–
1110, Jun. 2010.

27

[22] J. Garcia, S. Rodriguez, and A. Rusu, “A low-power ct incremental 3rd
order ΣΔ ADC for biosensor applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I,
Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 25–36, Jan. 2013.
[23] A. Dehennis and K. D. Wise, “A double-sided single-chip wireless pressure sensor,” presented at the 15th IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2002.
[24] K. Zhao, L. Jia, J. Duan, and J. Zhang, “Effects of thermosonic bonding
parameters on flip chip LEDs,” presented at the High Density Microsystem
Design Packaging Component Failure Analysis, Shanghai, China, 2006.
[25] J. D. Colvin, A. E. Colvin, A. DeHennis and J. L. Krsmanovic, “Light
emitting diode for harsh environments,” U.S. patent
[26] A. E. Colvin and H. Jiang, “Increased in vivo stability and functional
lifetime of an implantable glucose sensor through platinum catalysis,” J.
Biomed. Mat. Res. Part A, vol. 101A, no. 5, pp. 1274–1282, 2013.
[27] X. Wang, C. Mdingi, A. DeHennis, and S. Colvin, “Algorithm for an
implantable fluorescence based glucose sensor,” presented at the 34th
IEEE Annu. Int. Engineering Medicine Biology Society, San Diego, CA,
USA, 2012.
[28] V. Lodwig and L. Heinemann, “Continuous glucose monitoring with glucose sensors: Calibration and assessment criteria,” Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 572–586, 2003.
[29] S. Tankiewicz, J. Schaefer, A. DeHennis, and T. Whitehurst, “A co-planar,
near field communication (NFC) telemetry link for a fully-implantable
glucose sensor using high q, high permeability ferrites,” in Proc. IEEE
Sens., Baltimore, MD, USA, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[30] K. Rebrin, G. M. Steil, W. P. Van Antwerp, and J. J. Mastrototaro, “Subcutaneous glucose predicts plasma glucose independent of insulin: Implications for continuous monitoring,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 277, pp.
E561–E571, 1999.
[31] W. L. Clarke and B. Kovatchev, “Continuous glucose sensors: Continuing
questions about clinical accuracy,” J. Diabetes Sci. Tech., vol. 1, pp. 669–
675, 2007.

Andrew DeHennis (M’04) was born in Philadelphia,
PA, USA. He received the B.S. degree in physics from
Millersville University, Millersville, PA, in 1997, and
the M.S. degree in 2001 and Ph.D. degree in 2004 in
electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in the area of remotely
powered wireless monitoring systems.
He was a Software Engineer at Metrologic Instruments, Inc., Blackwood, NJ, USA, from 1998 to 1999
and was the Lead Engineer in the development of a
patented package dimensioning, bar code scanning,
and tracking conveyor belt system. Applications for these sensors ranged from
environmental monitoring to biomedical sensing. In 2004, he joined Senseonics Incorporated and is currently the Director of Engineering, where his teams
work focuses on the development of a human implantable, wireless, continuous glucose monitoring system with a “grain-of-rice” sized sensor along with
a wearable external monitoring system. Realizing this unique and challenging
system has required advances and innovation in RF materials, microassembly
and packaging, sensor/circuit integration, ASIC design, as well as sensor calibration means and algorithm development.

Stefan Getzlaff was born in Meissen, Germany, in
1969. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the Dresden University
of Technology, Dresden, Germany, in 1998 and 2003,
respectively.
From 1998 until 2003, he was with the Chair
of Highly-Parallel VLSI-Systems and Neuromorphic Circuits at the Dresden University of Technology. Since 2003, he has been with ZMDI—
Zentrum Mikroelektronik Dresden AG, Dresden. He
has worked as a Project Manager, Technical Lead, and
Analog Design Engineer in various mixed-signal ASIC development projects.

28

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

David Grice received the B.S.E.E. and M.S.E.E. degrees from Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX ,
USA.
He started his career at Sandia National Labs,
Washington, DC, USA as a System Design Engineer,
and in the semiconductor industry as a System Architect for ASICs and standard products. He is currently
a Senior Application Engineer for Sensor Signal Conditioner IC products.

Marko Mailand (M’04) was born in Zeitz, Germany,
in 1978. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the Dresden University of
Technology, Dresden, Germany, in 2003 and 2007,
respectively.
From 2003 until 2006, he was with the Chair
of Information Technology for Traffic Systems at
the Dresden University of Technology. In 2007, he
worked as Systems and Application Software Engineer for AMD Saxony. Since 2007, he has been
with ZMDI—Zentrum Mikroelektronik Dresden AG,
Dresden. He has worked as a Project Manager, System Architect, Technical
Lead, and Design-for-Test Champion in various mixed-signal ASIC development projects at ZMDI. He authored and coauthored more than 30 conference
and journal papers and filed several patents for analog/mixed-signal circuit solutions. His development activities and research interests include analog/mixedsignal integrated circuits, design-for-test, system-on-chip solutions, sensors,
sensor systems, and signal processing for consumer, industrial, and biomedical
applications.
Dr. Mailand received the Achievement Award at the International Conference
on Computer Science 2006 and was registered in Marquis’ Who’s Who in the
World 2009.

