IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

869

Noninvasive Assessment of Carotid Pulse Pressure
Values: An Accelerometric-Based Approach
Nicole Di Lascio∗ , Vincenzo Gemignani, Rosa Maria Bruno, Elisabetta Bianchini, Francesco Stea,
Lorenzo Ghiadoni, and Francesco Faita

Abstract—Objective: Central pulse pressure (cPP) is increasingly investigated as possible independent predictor of cardiovascular risk and carotid pulse pressure (carPP) can be used
as a surrogate of cPP. Despite its importance, carPP measurement remains challenging in clinical practice. The aim of this
study was to introduce a new easier-to-use method for noninvasive carPP evaluation based on the use of a MEMS accelerometer. Methods: carPP values (carPPa c c ) were obtained
in 22 subjects (10 males, 47 ± 17 years, hypertension: 50%)
postprocessing and double integrating the accelerometric signals. carPPa c c measurements were compared with tonometric
assessments (carPPto n ), and ultrasound-derived measurements
(carPPU S ). Moreover, accelerometric carotid pressure waveforms (Pa c c ) were contrasted in terms of shape to those obtained
by tonometry (Pto n ) and ultrasound images elaboration (PU S ),
calculating the root mean square error (RMSEto n , RMSEU S )
and the regression coefficients (rto n and rU S ). Moreover, both
the repeatability and reproducibility analyses were performed. Results: carPPa c c values (45.9 ± 10.6 mmHg) were significantly
correlated with carPPto n (47.5 ± 11.3 mmHg) and carPPU S
(43.3 ± 8.4 mmHg) assessments (R = 0.94, p < 0.0001 and
R = 0.80, p < 0.0001, respectively). The validity of the accelerometric approach was confirmed by morphological parameters (RMSEto n = 5 ± 1.95 mmHg, RMSEU S = 5.5 ± 2.3
mmHg, rto n = 0.94 ± 0.04, rU S = 0.93 ± 0.04). Coefficient
of variation (CV) was equal to 6.2% for the repeatability analysis,
while CV values for interoperator and intersession reproducibilities were 8.9% and 9.4%, respectively. Conclusion: The proposed
approach, providing an easier and more available measurement,
could represent a valid alternative to existing and used technique
for carPP assessment.
Index Terms—Carotid pulse pressure, double integration,
MEMS accelerometer.

I. INTRODUCTION
ULSE pressure (PP), defined as the difference between
systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood pressure values,
represents the pulsatile component of blood pressure and is investigated as a possible independent predictor of cardiovascular

P

Manuscript received June 4, 2015; revised August 3, 2015 and September 1,
2015; accepted September 4, 2015. Date of publication September 10, 2015;
date of current version March 17, 2016. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ N. Di Lascio is with the Institute of Life Science, Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Pisa 56124, Italy, and also with the Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Pisa 56124, Italy (e-mail: nicole.dilascio@
ifc.cnr.it).
V. Gemignani, R. M. Bruno, E. Bianchini, and F. Faita are with the Institute
of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council.
F. Stea is with the Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, and also with the Institute of Clinical Physiology, National
Research Council.
L. Ghiadoni is with the Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Pisa.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2477538

risk [1]. PP is made up of two major determinants, which are
the interaction of ventricular ejection with the viscoelastic properties of large arteries and the relevance of wave reflection:
age-related increase in PP is mainly due to stiffening of large
arteries and associated rise in wave reflection [2]. The clinical
significance of PP has already been demonstrated by previous
studies: indeed, it has been shown that, especially in an elderly
population PP, measured at the brachial level, has a greater predictive value than mean blood pressure (MBP), which is the
steady component of blood pressure [3]. This result has been
confirmed by a meta-analysis, which highlighted that in hypertensive patients PP, not MBP, is associated with an increased risk
of fatal events [4]. Brachial pulse pressure (bPP) assessment,
performed by sphygmomanometry, is widely used in clinical
practice for the individuation of high-risk patients [5]. Despite
the large spread of this measurement, it is well known that,
due to the overamplification phenomenon, the PP measured at
the brachial artery is significantly higher than the central (i.e.,
aortic) pulse pressure (cPP) experienced by heart, brain, and
kidney [6]. Recent evidences suggest that cPP is more strongly
related to cardiovascular disease and outcome than bPP [7]–[9]:
cross-sectional studies have shown that it is more closely correlated with largely accepted surrogate markers of cardiovascular
risk, such as carotid intima-media thickness [10], and its more
pronounced predictive value in comparison to bPP has been
confirmed also in patients with end-stage renal disease [11].
Moreover, it has been highlighted that different blood pressurelowering drugs have different impact on the reduction of central
pressure even producing similar effects on brachial pressure
[12]. It is also well known that carotid PP (carPP) can be considered as a good surrogate of cPP; this point, indeed, has been
previously validated with invasive measurements [13].
carPP is commonly assessed by means of applanation tonometry. With this technique, pressure waveforms are obtained noninvasively, slightly flattening the artery with a pressure sensor
and recording the pressure signal related to the transit of the
pulse wave in the vessel. cPP values can be calculated applying
a transfer function to radial artery waveforms [14] or calibrating
the applanation tonometry measurements obtained at the carotid
site [15]. In both cases, the recording of valid pressure waveforms requires a moderate level of technical expertise and, since
the artery needs to be correctly compressed between the sensor
and a hard structure, it can result particularly challenging in elderly and obese subjects. Moreover, in the case of transformed
radial pressures, the transfer function has been derived from
invasive measurements obtained from patients who underwent
catheterization and, thus, its validity for a general population is
still a debated matter [16].

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

870

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 1. (a) Accelerometric system and its main component. (b) Soft bracket
put on the patient’s neck.

As an alternative, methods based on ultrasound (US) images
have been introduced: in these approaches, carPP was assessed
deriving pressure values from the carotid diameter waveform
obtained with US imaging. The diameter curves were calibrated
supposing a linear or an exponential [17], [18] relationship
between pressure and diameter, and using diastolic and mean
brachial pressure values, under the hypothesis that their changes
throughout the arterial tree are negligible. A different US-based
approach has been also presented [19]: carotid pressure waveforms were reconstructed combining diameter evaluations, obtained from radiofrequency US signals, and local stiffness assessments, achieved by means of pulse wave imaging. For this
technique, the calibration procedure involving brachial measurements can be avoided. However, both of these US-based
approaches require specific equipment and operators skilled in
US imaging; moreover, the latter method is based on the use
of Bramwell–Hill equation and, thus, it needs some model assumptions, such as the absence of viscous friction effects and
the lack of wave reflections.
The aim of this study is to introduce a new method for noninvasive carPP assessment based on the use of an accelerometric
sensor. With the proposed approach, accelerometric signals are
elaborated to obtain carotid distension waveforms, which are
then linearly calibrated using brachial pressure measurements.
Carotid pressure curves and related PP values obtained using the
accelerometric sensor are compared with both those achieved
by means of standard tonometric readings and those calculated
through linear scaling of US-derived diameter curves.
II. ACCELEROMETRIC SIGNAL ACQUISITION AND PROCESSING
A. Operating Principle
The accelerometric-derived carotid pressure assessment is
based on the mechanical behavior of the carotid artery. The arrival of a PP wave in the vessel causes a change in pressure
and a related change in volume. To this variation in volume
corresponds a change in diameter and, thus, a vessel wall displacement. The accelerometric sensor is placed on a soft bracket
built on purpose: as shown in Fig. 1(b), this soft bracket is gently placed on the patient’s neck in order to put the sensor in

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the operating hypothesis. The signal detected by the sensor (S) is assumed to be generated by the movements of the
near wall of the vessel (NW). The vibrations caused by the displacement of
the far wall (FW) transit to the surrounding area and cannot be detected by the
sensor.

direct contact with the skin. The acquired signal represents the
acceleration related to the displacement of the near wall of the
carotid transmitted to the patient’s skin by the tissues located
between the skin itself and the vessel, under the hypothesis that
they are stiff and not able to soften the vibrations caused by
the movements of the vessel wall. The acquired signal is similar in shape to those obtained in previous studies by means
of a double-derivation operation applied on carotid distension
waveforms [20]–[22]. Performing a double integration on the
accelerometric signal is possible to obtain the near-wall displacement waveform. Under the hypothesis that the far wall
displacement is equal and opposite to that of the near wall (e.g.,
symmetric radial displacement) [23], the diameter waveform
can be achieved multiplying by 2 the signal obtained by means
of the double-integration operation. This operation is made possible assuming that the signal acquired by the sensor is related
only to the displacement of the near wall: indeed, hypothesizing
that the tissues close to the far wall of the vessel are stiff like
those placed between the near wall and the sensor, the vibrations produced by the far wall displacement are transmitted to
the surrounding area and cannot be detected by the accelerometric sensor (see Fig. 2). This signal represents the relative change
in diameter values over different cardiac cycles and, thus, the diameter waveform for less than a constant value, i.e., the diastolic
diameter measurement.
B. Hardware Features
The acquisition system is composed by a portable unit, that
is equipped with a commercial four electrodes ECG system and
a soft bracket, built on purpose, which has the accelerometric
sensor on board [see Fig. 1(a) and (b)]. Thanks to its geometrical shape, the soft bracket can be easily held by hand without directly touching the sensors. The sensor, allowed to freely
vibrate, is a standard linear triaxial MEMS accelerometer of
LIS3 family (model LIS344ALH, STMicroelectronics, Geneva,
Switzerland): it is able to measure the changes in gravity acceleration with a resolution of 10−3 g and have a full scale of

DI LASCIO et al.: NONINVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF CARPP VALUES: AN ACCELEROMETRIC-BASED APPROACH

±2g. The portable unit has two main subunits, one for the ECG
signal and the other for the accelerometric signal. Under the
hypothesis that the vessel wall displacement takes place along
the direction perpendicular to the neck, only the acceleration
component along this direction, i.e., perpendicular to the sensor plane, is collected. The accelerometric signal and the ECG
signal are acquired with a sampling frequency of 2 kHz. The
two signals are sent to a PC through a standard USB connection
and a customized software program is used for data storage,
visualization, and recording. The software was developed using
LabVIEW 8.5 (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA).
C. Postprocessing Elaboration
The double integration operation needed for calculating the
vessel wall displacement from the accelerometric signal was
performed as already described [24]. Briefly, the accelerometric
signal was high-pass filtered using a fourth-order Butterworth
digital filter with a cutoff frequency of 0.7 Hz; to overcome
phase differences between the unfiltered and the filtered signal,
the filter was applied in forward and backward direction. The
velocity was then approximated integrating the signal with the
trapezoidal rule [25]. Assuming no velocity below the cutoff frequency, the velocity signal was high-pass filtered with the same
filter used for the accelerometric waveform; the displacement
was thus provided applying the trapezoidal rule on the velocity
signal.
III. ACCELEROMETRIC SIGNAL ACQUISITION AND PROCESSING
A. Subjects
Twenty-two individuals were examined. The study protocol
was approved by the local Ethics Committee and informed consent was obtained from all participants. All the measurements
were performed by a single operator with subjects in supine
position for at least 10 min in a temperature-controlled room
(22–24 °C).
B. Brachial Pressure Measurements
Brachial blood pressure was measured at the left arm after 10 min of rest. The measure was repeated three times at
3-min intervals using an automated device (M6 Comfort, OMRON, Kyoto, Japan). bSBP, bDBP, and bPP measurements were
obtained averaging the last two measurements. bMBP values
were assessed by the formula bMBP = bDBP + 0.4 × bPP,
which has been demonstrated to better estimate the real brachial
MBP [26].
C. Tonometric Carotid Pressure Measurements
Tonometric measurements were performed after brachial
pressure assessment using the PulsePen device (Diatecne, Milan, Italy) [27]. Pressure waveforms were obtained at the left
common carotid artery and the recording was repeated three
times; systolic (carSBPton ), diastolic (carDBPton ), and pulse
(carPPton ) pressure values were obtained as the average of the
three measurements calculated from the software provided with

871

the device. The calibration procedure performed by the software
is based on the established concept that mean and diastolic blood
pressure can be considered constant throughout the arterial tree.
Accordingly, the pressure values recorded by tonometry are calibrated to diastolic and mean brachial blood pressure values.
A single-beat pressure curve Pton was achieved performing a
customized elaboration: once the R-peaks of the ECG signal
were detected using the Pan–Tompkins algorithm [28], one of
the tonometric recordings was divided on the basis on the local
minima identified as the minimum values between one R-peak
and the following. Outliers (e.g., beats which do not have the expected physiological shape) were removed; the remaining beats
were averaged after being interpolated in the frequency domain
in order to make them to be composed of the same data points.
D. US-Derived Carotid Pressure Assessments
Carotid scans were obtained by high-resolution B-mode
US using a 7.5–12 MHz linear array transducer (MyLab25,
ESAOTE, Genoa, Italy). For each subject, a single scan of the
left common carotid artery was acquired, aiming at obtaining
very clear interfaces. Diameter instantaneous values were automatically measured 1–2 cm beneath the bifurcation using
Carotid Studio software (Cardiovascular Suite, QUIPU srl, Pisa,
Italy) and the diameter signal was obtained from an image sequence of 10 s of duration (frame rate: 25 frames/s) [29]. Once
this signal was beat-to-beat divided detecting local minima, outliers (e.g., beats which do not have the expected physiological
shape) were discarded and the remaining beats underwent an
interpolation in the frequency domain aimed to achieve beats
with the same number of data points. A single-beat diameter
waveform was calculated averaging the selected and interpolated beats.
E. Accelerometric-Derived Carotid Pressure Evaluations
The near wall displacement curve derived from the accelerometric signal was processed using the same elaborating operations performed for the tonometric signal: the local minima,
identified starting from the location of the R-peaks of the ECG
signal, were used for dividing the signal and removing outliers;
the remaining beats were interpolated and averaged. A singlebeat relative diameter waveform was then achieved doubling
the single-beat displacement values, as explained in the previous section.
F. Calibration Procedure
US-derived carotid diameter curves were calibrated using
brachial pressure values to obtain carotid pressure curves and
related carotid pressure measurements. The calibration procedure, described in [15], is a linear approach: assuming the difference between MBP and DBP constant throughout the arterial tree, the minimum of the curves was set to the brachial
diastolic value and the remaining values were rescaled in order to obtain a mean value equal to MBP. CarPP assessments
(carPPUS ) were obtained estimating the difference between
the maximum (carSBPUS ) and the minimum (carDBPUS ) of

872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

the rescaled diameter waveform (PUS ). Accordingly with the
calibration procedure described, carotid diastolic pressure values (carDBPUS ) correspond to brachial diastolic pressure assessments. The accelerometric-derived pressure curves Pacc
were calculated implementing, on the single-beat relative diameter, the same calibration procedure performed for the diameter
signal derived from the US images elaboration. The use of relative values rather than absolute ones does not compromise results, since the scaling operation is linear and the relative and the
absolute diameter data differ only for the diastolic diameter measurement, which is a constant. Similarly to US-derived pressure
values, systolic (carSBPacc ) and diastolic (carDBPacc ) pressure assessments were obtained as maximum and minimum of
Pacc , respectively; even in this case, carDBPacc measurements
are equal to brachial diastolic pressure values. PP (carPPacc )
was estimated as the difference between the previous values.
All the postprocessing operations were performed with Matlab R2011a (MathWorks Inc, Natick, MA, USA).
IV. DATA ANALYSIS
Carotid pressure assessments obtained from the elaboration
of the accelerometric signal were compared with both tonometric and US-derived pressure evaluation: in order to properly assess whether accelerometric pressure values can be used
as alternative to tonometric and US-derived measurements, the
comparisons were performed in terms of functional and morphological parameters. PP estimation was used as a functional
parameter: in particular, the agreement between carPPacc and
carPPton and carPPUS was evaluated through the Pearson’s
coefficient (R); moreover, in both cases, a Bland–Altman analysis was performed [30]. For completeness, the same analysis
was performed on carSBP assessments. To compare pressure
curves from a morphological point of view, Pton and PUS ,
whose sample frequency were 500 and 25 Hz, respectively,
were interpolated in the time domain in order to reach the sample frequency of the Pacc signal (i.e., 2 kHz). After that, the
three waveforms underwent a frequency-domain interpolation:
in this way, they had the same number of data points and could
be easily compared. The root-mean-squared error (RMSE) was
chosen as morphological parameter; RMSEton and RMSEacc
were evaluated according to the following formula:

RMSEton =

RMSEUS =

N
i=1

(Pton,i − Pacc,i )2
N

N
i=1

(PUS,i − Pacc,i )2
N

 12
(1)
 12
(2)

where Pton,i and PUS,i are the tonometric and US-derived pressure values at a given point of the waveforms, respectively,
Pacc,i is the correspondent accelerometric pressure measurement and N is the number of points of the three curves. The
shape equivalence between Pacc and Pton and PUS was also
evaluated preforming a linear regression on the Pacc − Pton and
Pacc − PUS instantaneous assessments: regression values (rton
and rUS ) were used as additional morphological parameters.

TABLE I
SUBJECTS CHARACTERISTICS
Number of subjects
Percentage of males (%)
Age (years)
Height (m)
Weight (Kg)
BMI (Kg/m2 )
bDBP (mmHg)
bSBP (mmHg)
bPP (mmHg)
Smoking (%)
Hypertension (%)
Diabetes (%)
Dyslipidemia (%)

22
45.4%
47 ± 17
1.70 ± 0.08
74.9 ± 16.4
25.9 ± 5.4
77.3 ± 10.9
133 ± 16.5
55.7 ± 9.7
18%
50%
23%
27%

BMI: body mass index; bDBP: brachial
blood pressure; bSBP: brachial systolic
blood pressure; bPP: brachial pulse pressure.

The comparison between accelerometric and tonometric
carotid pressure evaluations was completed with the assessment of left ventricular ejection time (LVET) which can give
information about the left ventricular function [31]. LVETacc
and LVETton were calculated double deriving the accelerometric and tonometric carotid pressure waveforms by means of
a Savitzky–Golay filter [32]. The double-derived signals have
two local maxima which correspond to the aortic valve opening
and to the aortic valve closure, respectively [20]; LVET assessments were obtained calculating the temporal distance between
the two local maxima. For the comparison between LVETacc
and LVETton both correlation and Bland–Altman analysis were
performed.
In order to assess the variability of the accelerometric measurement, in a second group of 14 individuals, two different
skilled operators performed the accelerometric evaluation twice.
Furthermore, each operator repeated the evaluation after 1 h.
In this way, repeatability, interoperator, and intersession reproducibilities were assessed. For each case, carPPacc was chosen
as test parameter and the coefficient of variation (CV), calculated as the standard deviation between the two measurements
divided by their average, was used. The final CV value for the
repeatability analysis was obtained averaging CV evaluations
obtained for each operator in each session. In a similar manner,
interoperator CV assessment was achieved as the average of CV
values obtained in each session and intersession CV measurement was the average of CV values obtained by each operator.
All the statistical analyzes were performed using SPSS Version 22 (IBM, New York, NY, USA).
V. RESULTS
Characteristics of the study population are reported in Table I; data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Fig. 3
shows an example of accelerometric signal, derived velocity,
and displacement curves.
Typical examples of Pacc , Pton , and PUS are shown in Fig. 4.
carPPacc (45.9 ± 10.6 mmHg) values were in good correlation with both carPPton (47.5 ± 11.3 mmHg) measurements

DI LASCIO et al.: NONINVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF CARPP VALUES: AN ACCELEROMETRIC-BASED APPROACH

873

Fig. 4. Carotid pressure waveforms obtained for one individual in different
ways from the accelerometric signal (solid line), performing applanation tonometry (dashed line) and achieved elaborating US images (dotted line)

Fig. 3. (a) Example of an accelerometric signal. (b) Velocity waveform obtained by integrating once the accelerometric signal. (c) Displacement curve
achieved by a double-integration applied to the accelerometric signal.

and carPPUS (43.3 ± 8.4 mmHg) assessments (R = 0.94,
p < 0.0001 and R = 0.80, p < 0.0001, respectively) [see
Fig. 5(a)–(c)]. Same results were found for carSBP assessments:
carSBPacc values (123.3 ± 17.4 mmHg) were significantly correlated with carSBPton (124.9 ± 17 mmHg) and carSBPUS
(120.7 ± 15.7 mmHg) measurements (R = 0.97, p < 0.0001
and R = 0.93, p < 0.0001, respectively).
The Bland–Altman analysis provided a nonsignificant bias
of −1.54 mmHg (95% CI = 1.80 mmHg) for the comparison between carPPacc values and carPPton measurements;
the same result was found contrasting carPPacc assessments
with carPPUS estimation: even in this case, the bias, which
is equal to 2.63 mmHg, is not significant (95% CI = 2.92
mmHg) [see Fig. 5(b)–(d)]. The standard deviation of the difference was equal to 3.96 mmHg for the first comparison and
to 6.4 mmHg for the second. Similar outcomes were found
when considering carSBP values: the Bland–Altman analysis
provided nonsignificant bias for both carSBPacc − carSBPton
and carSBPacc − carSBPUS comparisons. Due to the fact that

Fig. 5. Comparison between carPP a c c − carPP to n (a), (b) and
carPP a c c − carPP U S (c), (d). Scatter and Bland-Altman plot are provided.

carPPacc , carPPton , and carPPUS measurements were all calculated starting from the same diastolic blood pressure value
(the brachial one), biases, confidence intervals, and standard
deviations of the difference obtained for the comparison between carSBPacc and carSBPton and between carSBPacc and
carSBPUS were the same than those achieved comparing PP
assessments.
Concerning LVET evaluations, LVETacc values (286 ± 22
ms) were significantly correlated with LVETton (278 ± 40 ms)
measurements (R = 0.72, p < 0.001). Furthermore, the Bland–
Altman analysis provided a nonsignificant bias equal to 7.4 ms
(95% CI = 12.8 ms).
No significant increase of difference between carPPacc and
carPPton with increasing the average of the two measurements (R = −0.17, p = 0.44) was found; the same analysis
for carPPacc − carPPUS comparison provided similar results,
namely no significant trend (R = 0.35, p = 0.10). Concerning morphological parameters, the mean RMSEton value was
equal to 5 ± 1.95 mmHg; a similar outcome, in terms of RMSE
assessment, emerged for RMSEUS (5.5 ± 2.3 mmHg). The regression analysis provided good regression values for both the

874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

comparisons: rton was equal to 0.94 ± 0.04 in average while for
rUS the mean value was 0.93 ± 0.04.
Repeatability analysis yielded a CV value equal to 6.2%;
concerning reproducibility, the CV value was 8.9% for the
interoperator analysis and equal to 9.4% for the intersession
one.
VI. DISCUSSION
In this study, a new method for noninvasive carotid pressure assessment has been introduced. The proposed approach
is based on the use of an accelerometric sensor and provides
carotid pressure measurements double integrating the acquired
accelerometric signal and obtaining a relative diameter waveform from it; the curve is then calibrated using brachial DBP and
MBP values. Emerging evidence suggest that central blood pressure is better related to future cardiovascular risk than brachial
pressure [33]. In particular, evidences are in favor to the fact
that cPP, rather than bPP, more accurately represents the load
imposed on coronary and cerebral arteries [34]; moreover, as
already demonstrated [13], aortic and carPP values can be used
as interchangeable measurements. For these reasons, the introduced technique can represent a useful alternative for carPP
assessment to existing and currently used approaches, based on
both tonometric acquisitions and calibrated diameter curves obtained from US images. The used accelerometer, indeed, is a
cheap and widespread sensor and its use for the carotid pressure
assessment does not require specific equipment or particular
skills of the operator.
carPPacc values are significantly correlated with carPPton
and carPPUS measurements. The evaluation of the Bland–
Altman plot does not show significant trend or cluster and the
corresponding analysis does not reveal significant bias for both
the comparisons. Similar results, in terms of correlation and
analysis of the differences, were found for carSBP assessments.
Moreover, mean values of the differences are comparable with
those reported in previous studies for similar assessments [17],
[19]. Nevertheless, the two Bland–Altman plots point out quite
large agreement intervals. This could be due to the hypothesis
made for the elaboration of the accelerometric signal leading to
the relative diameter waveform. Indeed, the carotid was assumed
to dilate symmetrically in the radial direction and the signal acquired was supposed to be totally produced by the vibrations of
the near wall. This hypothesis could not be completely fulfilled
since the possible presence of fixed structures (i.e., spinal bones)
close to the far wall could cause an increase in the signal acquired
by the sensor due to overlapping of far and near wall vibrations.
In this case, the doubling of the elaborated signal could lead to
an overestimation of the actual distension waveform; in addition, this deviation from theoretical conditions could vary for
each subject due to anatomical differences. However, since the
obtained agreement intervals are comparable with that achieved
for the comparison between PPton and PPUS reported by other
authors [17], [19], this source of error, which is specific for
accelerometric measures, is conceivably negligible. Concerning morphological parameters, the mean RMSE values indicate
that the shape of the carotid pressure waveform obtained with
the accelerometric sensor is similar to those calculated with

tonometric recordings and US-derived diameter curves. This result is confirmed by the high regression values achieved, which
underline the correspondence in shape between Pacc and both
Pton and PUS .
Even in the case of morphological parameters, the measurements achieved in this study are in line with similar comparisons
performed in previous studies: indeed, an RMSE value of 5.2
± 3.3 mmHg was reported in [17], while the correlation coefficients calculated in [19] were comprised between 0.94 and
0.98. Furthermore, similar results, in terms of RMSE values,
have been reported for the comparison between invasive aortic pressure waveforms and reconstructed pressure curves by
means of the transfer function (4 ± 2.1 mmHg) [35]. Additional
evidences are provided by the contrast between carotid pressure
curves obtained with different tonometric devices, for which an
RMSE value of 2.9 ± 1.5 mmHg is reported [36]. In this case,
however, the lower mean RMSE value is justified since pressure
curves are achieved with the same sensor and physical principle,
while in the case of the proposed device, signals acquired with
different kind of sensors and physical principles are compared.
Promising results were also provided by the LVET calculation:
indeed, LVETacc values turned out to be significantly correlated
with LVETton assessments and a nonsignificant bias was obtained when contrasting the two measurements. This evidence
suggests that the proposed technique is reliable even when providing parameters of more immediate clinical interest.
As regards repeatability and reproducibility analyses, the obtained CV values can be considered acceptable. Moreover, these
values are in line with those reported for the tonometry device
used in this study [27].
The most important limitation of this study is the small sample
size: a larger population, including individuals with cardiovascular disease is needed to confirm the results obtained by this
study and verify the validity of the approach in assessing carotid
pressure values also in pathological conditions. Another limitation concerns the applicability of the proposed technique in
case of big neck size since the accelerometric measurements
would result more troublesome in obese patients. Finally, the
Augmentation Index, which is achievable from pressure waveforms and widely used in clinical practice, was not calculated
processing the accelerometric curves: indeed, this parameter is
very sensible to noise and, thus, its accelerometric assessment
would turn out to be complicated.
VII. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this study shows that the accelerometric system could represent a valid alternative to existing and used
approaches for assessing carPP values. Accelerometric pressure
parameters are in good agreement with the evaluations achieved
with commonly used techniques based on different operating
principles, in terms of both functional and morphological assessments. Therefore, the proposed approach could provide a
concrete opportunity for an easier and more available PP evaluation; thanks to the large spread of the sensor by which the
system is composed, the introduced device would turn out to
be a useful tool in clinical practice and for future screening
programmes.

DI LASCIO et al.: NONINVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF CARPP VALUES: AN ACCELEROMETRIC-BASED APPROACH

REFERENCES
[1] A. M. Dart and B. A. Kingwell, “Pulse pressure—A review of mechanisms
and clinical relevance,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 37, pp. 975–984,
2001.
[2] W. W. Nichols et al., “Determinants of isolated systolic hypertension in
the elderly,” J. Hypertension Suppl., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. S73–S77, 1992.
[3] A. Benestos et al., “Pulse pressure: A predictor of long-term cardiovascular
mortality in a French male population,” Hypertension., vol. 30, no. 6,
pp. 1410–1415, 1992.
[4] J. Gasowski et al., “Pulsatile blood pressure component as predictor of
mortality in hypertension: A meta-analysis of clinical trial control groups,”
J. Hypertension, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 145–151, 2002.
[5] J. A. Whitworth et al., World Health Organization, International Society of Hypertension Writing Group “2003 World Health Organization
(WHO)/International Society of Hypertension (ISH) statement on management of hypertension,” J. Hypertens., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1983–1992,
2003.
[6] W. W. Nichols and M. O’Rourkem, McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries:
Theoretical, Experimental and Clinical Principles, 6th ed. London, U.K.:
Hodder Arnold, 2011, pp. 438–441.
[7] M. J. Roman et al., “Central pressure more strongly relates to vascular
disease and outcome than does brachial pressure: the strong heart study,”
Hypertension., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 197–203, 2007.
[8] R. Pini et al., “Central but not brachial blood pressure predicts cardiovascular events in an unselected geriatric population: The ICARe Dicomano
Study,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 51, no. 25, pp. 2432–2439, 2008.
[9] K. L. Wang et al., “Central or peripheral systolic or pulse pressure: Which
best relates to target organs and future mortality?” J. Hypertens., vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 461–467, 2009.
[10] P. Boutouyrie et al., “Association between local pulse pressure, mean
blood pressure, and large-artery remodelling,” Circulation., vol. 100,
no. 13, pp. 1387–1393, 1999.
[11] M. E. Safar et al., “Central pulse pressure and mortality in end-stage renal
disease,” Hypertension., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 735–738, 2002.
[12] B. Williams et al., “Differential impact of blood pressure-lowering drugs
on central aortic pressure and clinical outcomes: Principal results of the
conduit artery function evaluation (CAFE) study,” Circulation., vol. 113,
no. 9, pp. 1213–1225, 2006.
[13] R. Kelly and D. Fitchett, “Noninvasive determination of aortic input
impedance and external left ventricular power output: A validation and
repeatability study of a new technique,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 952–963, 1992.
[14] C. H. Chen et al., “Estimation of central aortic pressure waveform by
mathematical transformation of radial tonometry pressure. Validation of
generalized transfer function,” Circulation, vol. 95, no. 7, pp. 1827–1836,
1997.
[15] L. M. Van Bortel et al., “Non-invasive assessment of local arterial pulse
pressure: comparison of applanation tonometry and echo-tracking,” J.
Hypertension, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1037–1044, 2001.
[16] S. Hope et al., “Arterial transfer functions and the reconstruction of central
aortic waveforms: myths, controversies and misconceptions,” J. Hypertension, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 4–7, 2008.
[17] S. J. Vermeersch et al., “Determining carotid artery pressure from scaled
diameter waveforms: comparison and validation of calibration techniques
in 2026 subjects,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1267–1280, 2008.

875

[18] J. M. Meinders and A. P. Hoeks, “Simultaneous assessment of diameter
and pressure waveforms in the carotid artery,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 147–154, 2004.
[19] J. Vappou et al., “Non-invasive measurement of local pulse pressure
by pulse wave-based ultrasound manometry (PWUM),” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1653–1662, 2011.
[20] K. D. Reesink et al., “Carotid artery pulse wave time characteristics to
quantify ventriculoarterial responses to orthostatic challenge,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 102, no. 6, pp. 2128–2134, 2007.
[21] E. Hermeling et al., “The dicrotic notch as alternative time-reference point
to measure local pulse wave velocity in the carotid artery by means of
ultrasonography,” J. Hypertension, vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 2028–2035, 2008.
[22] E. Hermeling et al., “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness should
discriminate between systolic and diastolic pressure ranges,” Hypertension., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 124–130, 2010.
[23] T. Khamdaeng et al., “Arterial stiffness identification of the human carotid
artery using the stress-strain relationship in vivo,” Ultrasonics, vol. 52,
no. 3, pp. 402–411, 2012.
[24] L. Hoff et al., “Measurements of heart motion using accelerometers,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2004, vol. 3, pp. 2049–2051.
[25] K. E. Atkinson, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, 2nd ed. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 1989.
[26] W. J. Bos et al., “How to assess mean blood pressure properly at the
brachial artery level,” J. Hypertension, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 751–755, 2007.
[27] P. Salvi et al., “Validation of a new non-invasive portable tonometer for
determining arterial pressure wave and pulse wave velocity: the PulsePen
device,” J. Hypertension, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2285–2293, 2004.
[28] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BE-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[29] C. Giannarelli et al., “Local carotid stiffness and intima-media thickness
assessment by a novel ultrasound-based system in essential hypertension,”
Atherosclerosis, vol. 223, no. 2, pp. 372–377, 2012.
[30] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 1,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, 1986.
[31] S. Qureshi et al., “Evaluation of left-ventricular function in normal persons
and patients with heart disease,” J. Nucl. Med., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 135–141,
1978.
[32] A. Savitzky and M. J. E. Golay, “Smoothing and differentiation of
data by simplified least square procedure,” Anal. Chem., vol. 36, no. 8,
pp. 1627–1639, 1964.
[33] M. C. McEniery et al., “Central blood pressure: Current evidence and
clinical importance,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 35, no. 26, pp. 1719–1725, 2014.
[34] M. E. Safar, “Arterial aging–hemodynamic changes and therapeutic options,” Nat. Rev. Cardiol., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 442–449, 2010.
[35] B. E. Westerhof et al., “Individualization of transfer function in estimation
of central aortic pressure from the peripheral pulse is not required in
patients at rest,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 105, no. 6, pp. 858–863, 2008.
[36] D. Agnoletti et al., “Pulse wave analysis with two tonometric devices: A
comparison study,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1837–1848, 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

