138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Self-Adhesive and Capacitive Carbon
Nanotube-Based Electrode to Record
Electroencephalograph Signals
From the Hairy Scalp
Seung Min Lee, Jeong Hun Kim, Cheolsoo Park, Ji-Young Hwang, Joung Sook Hong,
Kwang Ho Lee, and Sang Hoon Lee∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—We fabricated a carbon nanotube (CNT)/adhesive
polydimethylsiloxane (aPDMS) composite-based dry electroencephalograph (EEG) electrode for capacitive measuring of EEG
signals. As research related to brain–computer interface applications has advanced, the presence of hairs on a patient’s scalp has
continued to present an obstacle to recorder EEG signals using dry
electrodes. The CNT/aPDMS electrode developed here is elastic,
highly conductive, self-adhesive, and capable of making conformal
contact with and attaching to a hairy scalp. Onto the conductive
disk, hundreds of conductive pillars coated with Parylene C insulation layer were fabricated. A CNT/aPDMS layer was attached on
the disk to transmit biosignals to the pillar. The top of disk was designed to be solderable, which enables the electrode to connect with
a variety of commercial EEG acquisition systems. The mechanical
and electrical characteristics of the electrode were tested, and the
performances of the electrodes were evaluated by recording EEGs,
including alpha rhythms, auditory-evoked potentials, and steadystate visually-evoked potentials. The results revealed that the electrode provided a high signal-to-noise ratio with good tolerance
for motion. Almost no leakage current was observed. Although
preamplifiers with ultrahigh input impedance have been essential
for previous capacitive electrodes, the EEGs were recorded here
by directly connecting a commercially available EEG acquisition
system to the electrode to yield high-quality signals comparable to
those obtained using conventional wet electrodes.
Index Terms—Adhesive electrode, brain–computer interface
(BCI), capacitive measurement, carbon nanotube (CNT), electroencephalography (EEG).
Manuscript received January 13, 2015; revised August 16, 2015; accepted
August 31, 2015. Date of publication August 31, 2015; date of current version
December 17, 2015. This work was supported by a grant of the Korea Healthcare technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health, Welfare & Family Affairs,
Korea (HI14C0771) and the Public Welfare & Safety research program through
the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2014039349). Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
S. M. Lee and J.-Y. Hwang are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Health Science, Korea University.
J. H. Kim is with the KU-KIST Graduate School of Converging of Sciences
& Technologies, Korea University.
C. Park is with the Department of Computer Engineering, College of Electronics & Information Engineering, Gwangwoon University.
J. S. Hong is with the Department of Chemical Engineering, Soongsil University.
K. H. Lee is with the Department of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Kangwon National University.
∗ S. H. Lee is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, College
of Health Science, Korea University, Seoul 136-703, South Korea (e-mail:
dbiomed@korea.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2478406

I. INTRODUCTION
HE noninvasive measurement of brain signals with a high
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) has emerged as a hot issue
in research fields associated with brain–computer interfaces
(BCIs), wearable devices, prosthetics and the diagnosis of significant brain disease including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or
spinal cord injury [1]–[7]. Recently, applications of brain signal measurements have been expanded to estimate emotions
or assess the need for a mental prosthesis [8]–[11]. The most
common brain signal that may be measured noninvasively is
the electroencephalograph (EEG). Although several methods
for examining brain activity have been developed, it has been
impossible to overemphasize the importance of EEG electrode
properties to EEG-based studies. Most EEG studies have employed wet electrodes, such as silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl)
electrodes or dry electrodes with conductive pastes. Although
these electrodes have long histories of use, they are limited in
their ability to measure signals long term or under mobile use
conditions. The conductive gels or pastes are not pleasant for a
patient, and residual gel is not easily removed from the scalp.
Gels tend to dry out over time, which decreases the signal quality and introduces skin irritation at the contact site. Alternative
dry electrodes have been developed to address these problems;
however, hair prevents direct contact between the scalp and the
electrodes, which present an obstacle to measuring EEG signals
with high quality. Noncontacting floating areas of the electrode
increase the impedance, introduce instabilities, and decrease
the signal quality. These problems have been partially overcome using dry electrodes with pins, bristles, or miniaturized
rings, and they enhanced contact with the scalp in the presence of hair [12]–[14]. Although the quality of EEG signal has
been improved, these electrodes are painful and/or penetrate
into the epidermis, which prevent long term wearing of electrode. In addition, their adhesion to the scalp tends to be unreliable. Another strategy has involved employing conductive foam
between the electrode and the scalp. The elastic mechanical
properties of foams prevent harm, even under applied pressures,
and provide better motion artifact tolerance [15]. However, the
adhesion between the foam and the scalp is still unstable, and
additional equipment is required to stabilize contact with a hairy
scalp. Recently, capacitive EEG measurements have been used
to circumvent the drawbacks of conventional EEG electrodes.

T

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LEE et al.: SELF-ADHESIVE AND CAPACITIVE CNT-BASED ELECTRODE TO RECORD EEG SIGNALS FROM THE HAIRY SCALP

Capacitive electrodes do not require conductive gels or pastes,
and complete contact with the scalp is not essential, as the EEG is
measured indirectly. Due to this property, long-term EEG signal
recording is accessible, and the measurements are electrically
safe due to the indirect contact with the metal layer. Although
this approach is quite promising for application to the BCI field
of research, capacitive EEG measuring methods still require further improvement. The high impedance between the electrode
and the scalp is unavoidable in capacitive electrodes due to the
presence of an insulation layer, air gap, and hair. The ultrahigh input impedance is essentially required in the acquisition
system; however, such high-impedance preamplifiers are very
sensitive to external noise and motion artifacts. Large electrode
surface areas and/or short distances to the scalp are required to
enhance the signal quality. In addition, the electrodes cannot
be fixed onto the scalp reliably without the use of additional
equipment, such as adhesive tape, hats, or bands. Long-term
wearable devices require electrodes that are small enough to be
hidden within the wearer’s hair; however, the drawbacks associated with the presence of hair must be addressed in order to
realize gel-free low-noise recordings.
This paper introduces a novel capacitive EEG electrode
composed of a carbon nanotube (CNT)/adhesive polydimethylsiloxane (aPDMS) nanocomposite material. Previous studies
described a conductive PDMS electrode prepared by mixing
CNTs in PDMS to form a uniform dispersion [16], [17]. We
succeeded in mixing CNTs to an aPDMS (MG-7 9850, Dow
Corning Company) [18]. The aPDMS has a low Young’s modulus and is highly biocompatible. A uniform mixture of CNTs and
aPDMS produces a material with excellent conductivity. The
advantages of aPDMS and CNTs act synergistically to provide
a low Young’s modulus, self-adhesive and conductive material
that can make conformal contact with the skin. The material was
found to be highly biocompatible and permit measurements of
the electrical potential on the skin over long periods of time. A
CNT/aPDMS electrode was autonomously attached to a scalp
without the use of specialized equipment or glue. The electrode made conformal contact with the hairy scalp. The air gap
between the electrode and the scalp was replaced by a conductive CNT/aPDMS layer that transmitted the EEG signals to the
electrode around the hairs. The contact area was enhanced by
fabricating pillar structures on the surface of the electrode. The
CNT/aPDMS layer and the pillar electrodes strongly enhanced
the electrical properties for use in capacitive coupling and EEG
recording with a high signal quality.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Features of the EEG Electrode
The strategy underlying the proposed EEG electrode design
is illustrated schematically in Fig. 1(a). Formal capacitive EEG
measurements are typically obtained by separating the scalp
and insulated metal layer through a gap that includes hair and
air as shown in left side of Fig. 1(a). In this case, the hair,
air, and insulator layer induce high impedance between metal
layer and scalp and directly affect the signal quality. In our
strategy, the gap is filled with conductive CNT/aPDMS. Due

139

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic illustration of the concept and design strategy implemented in the developed EEG electrode. (b) Structural illustration of the electrode, including the disk, CNT/aPDMS layer, and PDMS ring. (c) Bottom view
of the disk showing the pillars and bridges. (d) Cross-sectional view of the
pillars and bridges coated with a metal layer and a Parylene C layer.

to its softness, air gap caused by hair was mostly eliminated.
The EEG potential obtained from the scalp could, therefore,
be transmitted to the insulation layer because the CNT/aPDMS
layer was highly conductive and the influence of the hair could
be minimized. To increase capacitance between CNT/aPDMS
and metal layer, metal layer employed pillar structure.
The proposed electrode consisted of three components: a disk
layer, a PDMS ring, and a CNT/aPDMS layer, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(b). The disk layer is composed of SU-8, and the bottom surface was covered with cylindrical pillars and bridges
that increased the contact area [see Fig. 1(c)–(d)]. The top and
bottom of the disk were covered with a Ti/Au metal layer, and
both conductive surfaces were electrically connected via four
through holes. The electrode was connected to an external EEG
acquisition system by soldering the top of the disk layer [19]. On
the bottom of the disk layer, the cylindrical pillars (r = 50 μm
and h = 250 μm) with high aspect ratio were equally distributed
over a circle (r = 2 mm) separated by 150 μm, center-to-center,
and bridges connected the pillars to the neighboring pillars. Total 550 pillars and 1100 bridges were constructed. The entire
surface of pillars and bridges was covered with an Au/Ti metal
layer, and a Parylene C coating was applied as an insulating
layer. Fig. 1(d) shows the pillars and bridges in cross-sectional
view. The Parylene C layer prevented direct contact between the
conductive layer and the CNT/aPDMS layer and formed a capacitive couple between the two layers. This structure increased
the contact area between the metal layer and the conductive
CNT/aPDMS layer. Theoretically, the contact area was calculated to be 0.72 cm2 which is much higher than that of flat
shaped (area = 0.126 cm2 ).
B. Electrode Fabrication
The electrode was fabricated using a process commonly employed in the fabrication of MEMS technologies. A metal layer

140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

layer [see Fig. 2(j)]. The finished electrode was removed by
pulling it from the acryl mold [see Fig. 2(k)].
C. Biocompatibility Test
As CNT/aPDMS was to be attached on the scalp; the skin
compatibility was tested. 1 × 105 human fibroblast cells (CCD986k) were seeded and cultured on the developed electrode for
a week. The cell viability was analyzed by using an Invitrogen
Live/Dead Kit.
D. Mechanical Properties and Adhesion Force

Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the fabrication process used to prepare the
EEG electrode.

(Au 30 and Ti 15 nm) was deposited on the silicon wafer using an electron beam evaporator (SNTek, South Korea). SU-8
(Microchem Corporation, Newton, MA, USA) was then spin
coated to a thickness of 250 μm, baked at 95 °C on a hot
plate, and illuminated using UV light through a mask aligner
(MDA-400 S, MIDAS System, South Korea). After soft baking
at 95 °C, the wafer was developed using SU8 developer (Microchem Corporation, Newton, MA, USA), and the body of the
disk was fabricated [see Fig. 2(a)]. Pillars and bridges were constructed on the body of the disk layer using the same procedure
in 150 μm [see Fig. 2(b)]. The entire surface was coated with
Au and Ti (100 and 30 nm thick, respectively) using sputtering
(SME-200E, ULVAC, Japan) to form a conductive layer [see
Fig. 2(c)]. Prior to fabricating the insulation layer, the walls of
the through holes between the bottom and top of the disk were
masked using AZ GXR-601 (16 cp, AZ Electronic Materials,
Japan), which formed a scarification layer and was baked [see
Fig. 2(d)]. A Parylene C was coated on the bottom of the disk as
an insulating layer and its thickness was adjusted to 500 nm [see
Fig. 2(e)]. By the removal of the sacrificial layer with acetone,
the metal layer on the sidewalls of the through holes was exposed. The fabricated electrode was easily detached from wafer
by immersing in salt water and applying a potential [20]. An
AZ GXR-601 layer was applied to another silicon wafer. The
detached disk layer was turned upside down and placed onto
the GXR coated silicon wafer [see Fig. 2(f)] and baked. Ti and
Au (thickness: Au 100 nm and Ti 30 nm) were deposited on
the top surface of disk layer using an electron beam evaporator
[see Fig. 2(g)] and Ni was electroplated to make this surface
be solderable [see Fig. 2(h)]. The AZ GXR-601 was removed
with acetone to detach the fabricated disk from the wafer. A ringshaped PDMS layer (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning Company) was
prepared and bonded to the disk layer [see Fig. 2(i)]. The electrode was inserted into an acryl mold, and CNT/aPDMS solution
was poured and cured on the hot plate forming CNT/aPDMS

The designed electrode could be attached to the scalp without
the need for other equipment due to the adhesive PDMS. The
adhesion force to the scalp was quantitatively assessed by measuring the peak adhesion force during electrode detachment. The
electrode was connected to a force meter using a wire. This procedure (attach & detach) was repeated 30 times, and the contact
surface was cleaned using methanol every five times to remove
dust. This test was performed for the reusability of the electrode.
We also assessed the conformal contactability with the scalp
with hairs. The PDMS plate was prepared to display a Young’s
modulus equal to that of the skin (130 kPa) by adjusting the
mixing ratio between the liquid precursor (Sylgard 184 A, Dow
Corning Company) and the crosslinking agent (Sylgard 184 B,
Dow Corning Company) [21], [22]. Five hairs were placed on
this skin-like PDMS layer to simulate the mechanical conditions
presented by hair on the scalp. The CNT/aPDMS electrode surface was then put in contact with the simulated hairy scalp to
characterize the contact status via imaging through the bottom
side of the transparent PDMS layer.
E. Electrical Properties of the Electrode
The developed electrode was designed to act in a capacitive
coupling manner. Electrical safety was ensured by indirectly
contacting the electrode to the skin. The electrical safety was
assessed by measuring leakage current by applying a constant
current between 0 and 5 mA. The same procedure was applied
to a same electrode without Parylene C coating. The impedance
of the electrode was measured using impedance spectroscope
(Series G300, Gamry instrument, Warminster, PA, USA). The
developed electrode was placed on a conductive sheet to measure the impedance from the conductive sheet to the disk. We
assumed that the contact impedance between the conductive
sheet and the developed electrode was negligible, given that
Parylene C has a very high volume resistivity 6 × 1016 Ω · cm.
We simply assumed that the scalp and metal layers of the disk
could be modeled as a parallel capacitor Cp and resistor Rp
[23], [24]. Using this model, we calculated the loss tangent tan
δ of the electrode, which represents the ratio of the capacitive
reactance and resistance, according to
tanδ =

XC
1
=
.
Rp
ωRp Cp

(1)

In this equation, Xc indicates the capacitive reactance and ω
indicates the frequency in radians. This equation predicts that

LEE et al.: SELF-ADHESIVE AND CAPACITIVE CNT-BASED ELECTRODE TO RECORD EEG SIGNALS FROM THE HAIRY SCALP

a low-loss tangent corresponds to preferential biosignal transmission through the Cp rather than through the Rp . Under these
conditions, the scalp and disk will be predominantly capacitively
coupled.
The signal quality was investigated by measuring the noise
and calculating the SNR. For this measurement, we connected an
EEG simulator to a conductive plate using a wire. Five hairs were
placed in parallel on the conductive plate, and the developed
electrode was attached. For comparison, a similar electrode prepared using aPDMS without CNTs (instead of the CNT/aPDMS
layer) was tested using the same setup [25]. Because the aPDMS
layer was non-conductive and very high impedance was expected, a preamplifier (OPA124, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX,
USA) with a 20 GΩ bias resistor was included in the circuit.
The recording signals obtained from the EEG simulator xES (t),
along with the EEG signal xM S (t), were measured at the two
different electrodes over 60 s, and the SNR was calculated
according to

xES (t)2
.
(2)
SNR (dB) = 10 log 
(xM S (t) − xES (t))2
Prior to calculating the SNR, unnecessary noise that would
affect the SNR, such as power noise, was removed using an
offline low-pass filter with cutoff frequency at 35 Hz. The motion
artifact tolerances of the electrodes were quantified by attaching
a conventional disk electrode, the developed electrode, and the
developed electrode prepared without CNTs onto a conductive
plate. The conventional dry EEG electrode was attached and
fixed using a conductive paste (ElefixZ-401CEl Nihon Kohden,
Tokyo, Japan), whereas the other electrodes were self-adhesive
and could be reliably attached. The plate was placed on a shaking
plate and rotated at 2 Hz.
F. EEG Measurements
The EEG signals were measured using a conventional physiological measurement system (MP150, BioPAC Systems, Inc.,
Goleta, CA, USA) with a bandpass filter between 0.5 and 35 Hz,
amplified 10 000 times and digitized at 1 kHz. The reference
and ground electrodes were attached to A2 and Fpz , respectively. For comparison, a disk-type EEG electrode with paste
was attached adjacent to the developed electrode to minimize
variations due to the positioning on the scalp. The performances
of the developed and conventional electrodes could, then, be
compared directly.
Signals from five normal volunteers of mean age 26.7 ± 2.3
years were assessed using the electrodes. Prior to attachment,
the subjects were instructed to clean the site at which the electrode was to be attached using 30% ethanol. The study protocol
was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Korea
University, and all subjects provided written informed consent.
The measurements were carried out under the controlled temperature and humidity which were 25 °C and 55%, respectively.
Three typical EEG paradigms, each of which is widely used in
BCI research, were used under the test conditions implemented
here: alpha rhythm detection, steady-state visually evoked potential (SSVEP) detection, and N100 auditory evoked potential

141

(N100 AEP) detection. During the alpha rhythm detection and
SSVEP tests, we attached the recording electrodes at the Oz
site. The subjects were instructed to relax and stay calm while
the eyes remained open for 20 s and then closed for another
20 s during alpha rhythm recording. The signals recorded during open- and closed-eye were analyzed and compared over
the power spectrum density (PSD). The coherence between the
signals measured at the developed and conventional electrodes
was also calculated. The SSVEP test was conducted by applying visual stimuli using four LEDs. The LEDs were designed
to flicker at 13 Hz with a 50% duty cycle. Subjects focused on
the LEDs while the EEG was recorded in a silent dark room.
The accuracy of the developed electrode was assessed at flickering frequencies of 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, and 13.4 Hz. The N100
AEP test was conducted by moving the recording electrodes
to the Cz site. The auditory stimuli were supplied at 1.3 kHz
over 300 ms, and the amplitude was adjusted to 90 dB using a
sound meter (SC-30, CESVA, Spain). The stimulus interval was
randomly altered between 1 and 1.5 s to prevent habituation to
the stimulus rhythm. As the AEP signal is very small, subjects
were instructed to blink their eyes between each stimulus. The
stimuli were applied 200 times, and the stimuli signals were
recorded at a 50-kHz sampling rate to identify the starting point
of each stimulus. The signals from developed and conventional
electrodes were compared by calculating the p-value for each
averaged segment between 0 and 0.3 s. The N100 test was assumed to be significant when the p-value at the negative peak
between 80 and 120 ms reached values less than 0.01. The minimum numbers of stimuli needed to measure a significant change
in the average signals were estimated.
III. RESULT
A. Developed EEG Electrode
The fabricated disk is shown in Fig. 3(a). Scanning electron microscopy images of the bottom of the disk are shown
in Fig. 3(b). The cross-sectional view of the surface coated
with Parylene C from the region indicated by the red-dashed
line in Fig. 3(b) is shown in Fig. 3(c). The pillars and bridges
were successfully fabricated to enlarge the contact area with the
CNT/aPDMS layer. Fig. 3(d) shows an optical image of the developed EEG electrode with a height and radius of 2.5 and 3 mm,
respectively. The top of the disk was connected to the recording
device by soldering wire. When the electrode was initially put
on an exposed hairy scalp, it did not contact to the scalp perfectly
due to hair. However, when a gentle pressure was applied, the
CNT/aPDMS layer filled in air gaps. As a result, the electrode
was conformally attached to the scalp as shown in Fig. 3(e).
We should note that this attachment was accomplished without
any kind of gel or adhesives. For the biocompatibility test, we
also found that most of the cells cultured on the electrode were
viable as shown in Fig. 3(f).
B. Mechanical Test
The adhesion force between the developed electrode and the
scalp was measured after the first attachment and was found

142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 3. (a) Bottom view of the disk and (b) its SEM image. (scale bar =
100 μm) (c) SEM image of cross-sectional view of the surface of the disk.
(scale bar = 2 μm) (d) Optical view of the developed electrode. (e) Attachment
of the EEG electrode to the scalp. (f) Viability of skin cells on CNT/aPDMS.
Green indicates live, and red indicates dead cells.

to be 1.62 ± 0.11 N/cm2 . This force decreased upon repeated
attachment and detachment, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Cleaning
the surface of the CNT/aPDMS layer with methanol restored the
adhesion force, although the force was slightly lower than the
value obtained after the first attachment event. Fig. 4(b) shows
a schematic illustration of the CNT/aPDMS layer in contact
with the test scalp composed of PDMS and hair and optical
view from the bottom. Air gap between the PDMS layer and
the electrode was invisible at all and the CNT/aPDMS layer
successfully formed conformal contacted with the scalp around
the hair.
C. Electrical Test
The measured leakage current is plotted in Fig. 5(a). The presence of a Parylene C coating, which acted as a good insulator,
yielded almost no leakage current comparing to the electrode
without Parylene C coating. These results suggested that the developed electrode significantly attenuated the electrical leakage
current during acquisition of the signal [26]. The influence of
the pillars was assessed by measuring the impedance value of
the electrode fabricated with/without pillars. In addition, pillars
with different sizes [r = 100 (contact area = 0.427 cm2 ) and
200 μm (contact area = 0.276 cm2 )] were also tested to observe the influence of the size of the pillars on the impedance.

Fig. 4. (a) Adhesion test applied to the developed electrode on a hairy scalp.
The attaching surface was cleaned after every set of five attachment/detachment
cycles. (b) (Top) Illustration of a CNT/aPDMS layer attached to a PDMS skin
model, with hairs inserted between the two surfaces and (bottom) optical image
of the contact state of the CNT/aPDMS layer on the PDMS in the presence of
the hairs.

In the absence pillars, the electrode impedance was 726.2 kΩ
at 0.1 Hz. This value decreased exponentially as the frequency
increased, as shown in Fig. 5(b); however, the addition of the
pillars reduced the impedance to 403.4, 213.6 and 117.21 kΩ at
0.1 Hz as the radius of the pillars decreases. This implies that the
contact area between the metal layer and the CNT/aPDMS layer
is significantly related to impedance. As a result, in spite of the
existence of Parylene C as an insulating layer, the pillars highly
enhanced electrical properties. The resistance and capacitance
of developed electrode were measured by multimeter (Model
117, Fluke Corporation, Everett, WA, USA) and were found to
be 14.9 MΩ and 108 nF. The measured parameters were used to
calculate the loss tangent, and the results are shown in Fig. 5(c).
Although the loss tangent decreased as the frequency increased,

LEE et al.: SELF-ADHESIVE AND CAPACITIVE CNT-BASED ELECTRODE TO RECORD EEG SIGNALS FROM THE HAIRY SCALP

143

Fig. 6. (a) SNR. (b) Quantified motion artifacts obtained from the developed
EEG electrode (red) or an electrode prepared without CNTs (blue).

an SNR of 2.79 ± 0.13 dB, suggesting that the CNTs in the
aPDMS matrix enhanced the signal quality. Here, we note that an
SNR of 3.71 ± 0.17 dB was obtained in the absence of a preamplifier, and the signals can be obtained only using commercialized EEG acquisition system without modification. In contrast,
the electrode fabricated without CNTs and preamplifier could
not measure an EEG signal, indicating that the SNR was very
poor and was comparable to the noise. The presence of CNTs in
the aPDMS matrix improved the electrode’s tolerance to motion
artifacts, as shown in Fig. 6(b). These values were obtained by
calculating the standard deviation of the recorded signal and
then normalizing the resulting signal based on the value obtained using the conventional electrode. Compared to conventional electrodes affixed to a surface using conductive paste, the
standard deviation of the signal recorded using the developed
electrode was 1.4 ± 0.21 times higher while it was 5 ± 0.77
for same electrode but without CNTs. For the electrode without
CNTs, most recorded signals were saturated due to the high
prevalence of motion artifacts.
E. EEG Recordings

Fig. 5. (a) Leakage current measured from an electrode with (blue) and without (red) Parylene C coating (b) Impedance of the electrode prepared with
various pillar sizes and without pillars and bridges. (c) Calculated loss tangent
in the frequency domain.

its value is small enough that most EEG signal within the EEG
characteristic bands was measured via capacitive coupling.
D. Signal Quality
Fig. 6(a) shows the SNR results obtained from these measurements. The values shown in Fig. 6(a) indicate the averages and standard deviations calculated from five trials for an
aPDMS layer prepared with/without CNTs. The SNR of the
developed electrode was calculated to be 3.71 ± 0.17 dB, even
though several hairs were inserted between the electrode and
the model scalp. The aPDMS prepared without CNTs provided

Fig. 7(a)–(c) shows the results obtained from the alpha rhythm
detection tests. After closing the eyes for 20 s, the alpha wave
began [see Fig. 7(a)]. Evidence for the alpha rhythm based on the
PSD measurements is presented in Fig. 7(b). The red bars represent the PSD measured when the eyes were opened, whereas
the blue bars represent the PSD measured when the eyes were
closed. The dominant peak between 9 and 11 Hz corresponds
to time points measured while the eyes were closed, whereas
these signals were not observed while the eyes were opened.
The coherence between the signals measured while the eyes
were closed using the developed and conventional electrodes
is illustrated in Fig. 7(c). Near 10 Hz, coherence was close to
unity so that its alpha wave was very close to that from conventional electrode. Considering that the electrodes were attached
to the scalp with some spatial separations, these results reveal
that the developed electrode performed very well. The SSVEP
test demonstrated this excellent performance as well. Fig. 7(d)
shows the results obtained from the SSVEP test, and even
0.1 Hz frequency variations could be observed. The accuracy
was also characterized quantitatively using the AEP test. The
EEG signals measured using the conventional and developed
electrodes were aligned based on the starting point of the stimulus and were averaged. The AEP waveforms measured using the

144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE EEG ELECTRODES
Author [ref. #]

Fig. 7. (a) EEG recordings in the time domain, collected during the alpha
attenuation test. The eyes were closed for 20 s. (b) PSD of the recorded EEG
signals measured with the eyes open (red) or closed (blue). (c) Coherence between the signals measured using the developed or conventional EEG electrodes.
(d) SSVEP, depending on the stimulus frequency.

Type

Advantages

Wang et al. [12]

Dry

Contact to the scalp
through hair Long-term
measurements
Contact to the scalp
through hair

Grozea et al. [13]

Dry

Nikulin et al. [14]

Wet

Lin et al. [15]

Dry + Form

Lee et al. [25]

Capacitive

Baek et al. [27]

Capa-citive +
Form

Chi et al. [28]

Dry

Very light Minimally
visible Automatically
attached
High geometric
conformity Motion
tolerable
Self-adhesive
Noncontact Can measure
EEG through hair
indirectly
Noncontact Contact to
the scalp through hair

Drawbacks
Hard Equipment
required for fixation
Discomfort after some
time Equipment
required for fixation
Leaves residue
Short-term
measurements
Equipment required for
fixation
Motion artifacts
Preamplifier required
Hard, large size
Equipment required for
fixation
Hard, large size
Equipment required for
fixation Low SNR

function of time for each averaged segment collected using the
conventional or developed electrodes. The p-value decreased
nearly 100 ms as the stimulus was repeated for both electrodes.
Assuming that a p-value of less than 0.01 is significant, the
p-values of the conventional electrodes dropped below 0.01 after
averaging 12.8 ± 2.8 stimuli, whereas 14.8 ± 3.6 stimuli were
needed to achieve the same level of significance in the signal
measured using the developed electrode. The developed electrode required only a couple of additional AEP N100 stimulus
curves over the number of curves needed to reach significance
for the conventional electrode.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 8. Auditory-evoked potentials measured using (a) the conventional and
(b) the developed electrodes and averaged over 200 stimuli (red) or 20 stimuli (blue). Surface plots of the accumulated p-values for conventional (c) and
developed one (d), according to the stimulus trial number.

conventional or developed electrodes over 20 (blue) or 200 (red)
times were averaged, as illustrated in Fig. 8(a) and (b). The averaged AEP waveform obtained by averaging over 200 stimulus
segments was assumed to be the correct waveform as the signal
averaging rejected random waves while amplifying the consistent AEP signal. Although AEPs were averaged only 20 times,
the waveform approached the curve obtained from the average
of 200 stimulus segments and waveforms displayed dominant
negative peaks nearly 100 ms after a stimulus. Fig. 8(c) and (d)
shows the negative logarithm of the p-values (–log p-value) as a

In Table I, we described advantages and drawbacks of some
representative EEG electrodes [12]–[15], [25], [27], [28]. The
EEG electrodes fabricated in this study have solved many drawbacks. We showed the successful fabrication of a self-adhesive
capacitively coupled EEG electrode that is capable of making
conformal contact with a human scalp and produced a high
signal quality, even in the presence of hairs between the scalp
and the electrode surface. The developed electrode could be autonomously attached to the scalp without the need for additional
equipment. The attachment of the electrode was semipermanent,
as the adhesion force was easily restored using a cleaning procedure. The developed electrode did not require the use of a
preamplifier because the insulation layer was thin and the effective contact area was large. Therefore, our electrode can easily
be connected to a conventional signal acquisition system, which
is a great advantage for the wearable EEG recording system. The
quality of measured EEG signal was high and the electrode can
pick up the dominant alpha wave and the dominant peaks from
the SSVEP test, even though the stimulus frequencies were separated by only 0.1 Hz. Only a few stimulus segments needed to be
averaged in order to detect the significant changes in the N100
AEP test signal, which involves the extensive application of

LEE et al.: SELF-ADHESIVE AND CAPACITIVE CNT-BASED ELECTRODE TO RECORD EEG SIGNALS FROM THE HAIRY SCALP

developed electrode including BCI because the minimum number of stimuli needed to calculate a significant change in the EEG
was directly related to the speed of the BCI application. The conformal contact with the scalp and enlarged contact area between
the CNT/aPDMS layer and the disk layer may have contributed
to the excellent signal detection accuracy. The CNT/aPDMS
layer successfully penetrated into the gap formed between the
hairs and the scalp to minimize the floating electrode surface
area. The conformal contact provided the same function as a
conductive paste that fills the air gaps that can form between
an electrode and the scalp. The CNT/aPDMS layer transmits
an EEG signal even though the hairs exist and the quality of
measured signal was high although the high-impedance amplifier was not employed. The motion tolerance of the developed
electrode was mostly comparable to that of conventional electrodes. As motions occurred, the CNT/aPDMS layer adsorbed
any strain forces induced by motions while preserving the conductive path. Moreover, slight deformations of CNT/aPDMS did
not affect the impedance [15]. Dry electrodes can sometimes introduce artifacts caused by nonnegligible friction between the
hairs and the dry electrode surface during slippage, even though
such motions are typically small. Therefore, a capacitive electrode with ultrahigh input impedance may be particularly sensitive to friction artifacts. In contrast, CNT/aPDMS layer immobilize hairs tightly, and provides much higher barrier to friction
slippage, even though the developed electrode was technically
a dry electrode.
The developed electrode showed high biocompatibility although CNT was mixed in aPDMS. Upon CNT exposure to
the skin, the CNTs first have to penetrate the stratum corneum
layer, the outermost layer (about 20 μm) of the epidermis that
consists of several sheets of keratinized dead cells. Then, they
need to travel through the viable epidermal layers to gain access
to the capillaries within the papillary layers of the dermis to get
into the systemic circulation for cytotoxicity [29]. In our system, whole bundles or the majority of CNTs are tightly bound
in a polymer matrix [18]. The protruded tubes (<1 μm) from
CNT/aPDMS might be able to sense bioelectric currents on the
surface of the skin, while not penetrating nor travelling into the
epidermis.
A Parylene C layer was applied to form an insulating layer
between the scalp and the EEG acquisition system. Electrical
safety is one of the main advantages offered by capacitive measurement systems. High volume resistivity of the developed
electrode resulted in almost no leakage current compared to the
conductive electrode. The loss tangent showed most EEG signals were measured via a capacitive path. According to the IEC
60601-1 guidelines, a current exceeding 0.5 mA is not permitted
to flow into the body from a wearable device [26]. The developed electrode avoids this concern intrinsically and is highly
safe to use.
We fabricated pillars and bridges to increase the contact area
between the CNT/aPDMS and the scalp. A higher aspect ratio
of pillars is expected to increase the contact area; however,
the aspect ratio was set to 5 to ensure reliable fabrication and
stability during use. The high contact area permitted a smaller

145

size of capacitive electrode, which is one of the great advantages
of proposed electrode for the application to wearable devices.
The diameter of the developed electrode was only 6 mm and is
nearly the same size of conventional disk-type EEG electrode.
The electrode size is directly related to the spatial resolution of
the EEG distribution as potentials on the electrode are equally
averaged and, consequently, it acts as a spatial low-pass filter.
As most of the EEG analysis were performed using the smallsize conventional electrodes, the developed electrode may be
applicable to a variety of EEG study types.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We developed a CNT/aPDMS-based EEG electrode that
could be attached to a scalp without use of assistant equipment.
The CNT/aPDMS layer reliably attached to a scalp covered
with hairs and formed conformal contact with the scalp. The
developed electrode was then used to measure EEG signals in
a capacitive way by relying on the presence of pillar and bridge
structures and a Parylene C layer on the electrode surface, all
of which ensured electrical safety. The signal quality, including
the sensitivity to motion artifacts, was found to be comparable
to the signal quality of conventional wet EEG electrodes. The
developed electrode was reusable, semipermanent, and easy to
use, as an additional preamplifier was not required, and any gel
was not required, which involves the extensive applications to
the wearable devices.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Kubler et al., “Patients with ALS can use sensorimotor rhythms to
operate a brain-computer interface,” Neurology, vol. 64, pp. 1775–1777,
May 24, 2005.
[2] B. Poletti et al., “Brain computer interface and eye-tracking technology
for neuropsychological assessment of ALS patients,” Dementia Geriatric
Cognitive Disorders, vol. 33, pp. 186–187, 2012.
[3] H. Lahrmann et al., “Usefulness of an EEG-based brain-computer interface to establish communication in ALS,” J. Neurol. Sci., vol. 238,
pp. S458–S458, Nov. 15, 2005.
[4] G. R. Muller-Putz, I. Daly, and V. Kaiser, “Motor imagery-induced
EEG patterns in individuals with spinal cord injury and their impact
on brain-computer interface accuracy,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 11, Jun.
2014.
[5] C. E. King et al., “Operation of a brain–computer interface walking simulator for individuals with spinal cord injury,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.,
vol. 10, Jul. 17, 2013.
[6] D. Ko et al., “A dry and flexible electrode for continuous-EEG monitoring
using silver balls based polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),” Biomed. Eng.
Lett., vol. 2, pp. 18–23, 2012.
[7] R. Kim et al., “Recent trends in microelectrode array technology for in
vitro neural interface platform,” Biomed. Eng. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 129–141,
2014.
[8] A. Ponz et al., “Emotion processing in words: A test of the neural re-use
hypothesis using surface and intracranial EEG,” Social Cogn. Affective
Neurosci., vol. 9, pp. 619–627, May 2014.
[9] X. Jie et al., “Emotion recognition based on the sample entropy of EEG,”
Bio-Med. Mater. Eng., vol. 24, pp. 1185–1192, 2014.
[10] P. C. Petrantonakis and L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Emotion recognition from
EEG using higher order crossings,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 186–197, Mar. 2010.
[11] Y. P. Lin et al., “EEG-based emotion recognition in music listening,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1798–1806, Jul.
2010.
[12] L. F. Wang et al., “PDMS-based low cost flexible dry electrode for longterm EEG measurement,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 2898–2904,
Sep. 2012.

146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

[13] C. Grozea et al., “Bristle-sensors-low-cost flexible passive dry EEG electrodes for neurofeedback and BCI applications,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8,
Apr. 2011.
[14] V. V. Nikulin et al., “Miniaturized electroencephalographic scalp electrode for optimal wearing comfort,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121,
pp. 1007–1014, Jul. 2010.
[15] C. T. Lin et al., “Novel dry polymer foam electrodes for long-term EEG
measurement,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1200–1207,
May 2011.
[16] H. C. Jung et al., “CNT/PDMS composite flexible dry electrodes for
long-term ECG monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5,
pp. 1472–1479, May 2012.
[17] J. H. Lee et al., “Shear induced CNT/PDMS conducting thin film for
electrode cardiogram (ECG) electrode,” Biochip J., vol. 6, pp. 91–98,
Mar. 20, 2012.
[18] S. M. Lee et al., “Self-adhesive epidermal carbon nanotube electronics
for tether-free long-term continuous recording of biosignals,” Sci. Rep.,
vol. 4, p. 6074, 2014.
[19] D. H. Baek et al., “Soldering-based easy packaging of thin polyimide multichannel electrodes for neuro-signal recording,” J. Micromech. Microeng.,
vol. 22, Nov. 2012.
[20] J. H. Kim et al., “An electroplating-free and minimal noise polyimide
microelectrode for recording auditory evoked potentials from the epicranius,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3425–3431, Dec.
2013.
[21] H. Y. Cheng and S. D. Wang, “Mechanics of interfacial delamination in
epidermal electronics systems,” J. Appl. Mech.-Trans. Asme, vol. 81, Apr.
2014.
[22] S. D. Wang et al., “Mechanics of epidermal electronics,” J. Appl. Mech.Trans. Asme, vol. 79, May 2012.
[23] S. M. Lee et al., “Thin and flexible active electrodes with shield for
capacitive electrocardiogram measurement,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 48, pp. 447–457, May 2010.
[24] Y. G. Lim et al., “ECG measurement on a chair without conductive contact,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 956–959, May 2006.
[25] S. M. Lee et al., “A capacitive, biocompatible and adhesive electrode
for long-term and cap-free monitoring of EEG signals,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 10, Jun. 2013.
[26] J. W. Jeong et al., “Capacitive epidermal electronics for electrically safe,
long-term electrophysiological measurements,” Adv. Healthcare Mater.,
vol. 3, pp. 642–648, May 2014.
[27] H. J. Baek et al., “Conductive polymer foam surface improves the performance of a capacitive EEG electrode,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 12, pp. 3422–3431, Dec. 2012.
[28] Y. M. Chi et al., “Dry and noncontact EEG sensors for mobile braincomputer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 228–235, Mar. 2012.
[29] N. A. Monteiro-Rivierem and A. O. Inman, “Challenges for assessing carbon nanomaterial toxicity to the skin,” Carbon, vol. 44,
pp. 1070–1078, May 2006.

Seung Min Lee received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2005, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in interdisciplinary program for bioengineering from Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2007 and 2012,
respectively. The thesis of his Ph.D. degree was focused on the nerve recording using implantable devices and analyzing physiological signal.
He is currently a research professor at Korea University, Seoul, Korea. His research interests include
active microelectrodes, new electronic materials, and
electronic devices for biomedical engineering.

Jeong Hun Kim was born in Korea in 1985. He
received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering
from Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea, in 2010, and
the M.S. degree in biomedical electronics and information engineering from Korea University, Seoul,
Korea, in 2013. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in NBIT, KU-KIST Graduate School of
Converging Science and Technology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.
His current research interests include microelectrode, biological microelectromechanical system, MEMS, and neural engineering.

Cheolsoo Park received the B.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from Sogang University, Seoul, South
Korea, and the M.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. In 2012, he received the Ph.D. degree in adaptive
nonlinear signal processing from Imperial College
London, London, U.K., and worked as a Postdoctoral
Researcher in bioengineering department at University California, San Deigo, CA, US.A.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in Kwangwoon University, Seoul, Korea. His research interests
include the area of machine learning, adaptive and statistical signal processing,
with applications in wearable devices, brain computer interface, and computational neuroscience.

Ji-Young Hwang received the Ph.D. degree in biochemistry from the University of Duesseldorf, Dusseldorf, Germany, in 2001.
She was a Research Scientist at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, from 2003
to 2006 and as a Government Officer at the National
Institute of Health, South Korea, from 2006 to 2008.
In 2009, she moved to the Samsung Biomedical Research Institute as a Senior Scientist and joined Institute of Tissue Regeneration Engineering at Dankook
University, South Korea, as a Research Professor
since 2011. Her main research activities include research on the molecular
mechanisms and cellular processes in human nerve diseases, discovery and
exploration on potential regeneration-targeted genes/proteins, and design and
development of platforms, biomedical devices and biosensors.

Joung-Sook Hong received the B.S. degree in chemical engineering from Cheju National University, Jeju,
Korea, in 1995, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
chemical engineering from the Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1997 and 2005, respectively.
She was a Research Associate at the University of
Queensland in 2006, a Research Assistant Professor
at Korea University in 2007, and a Senior Researcher
at Chemical Research Center, Samsung Cheil Industry, in 2008. She is currently a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Soongsil University,
Seoul, Korea. Her current interests include the dispersion of carbon nanotube
in a nonNewtonian fluid, drop generation and deformation, interfacial rheology,
polymer blend, and composite.

LEE et al.: SELF-ADHESIVE AND CAPACITIVE CNT-BASED ELECTRODE TO RECORD EEG SIGNALS FROM THE HAIRY SCALP

Kwang-Ho Lee received the Bachelor’s and Master’s
degrees from Dankook University, Korea, in 2001 and
2003, respectively. He received the Ph.D. degree from
the Interdisciplinary Program in medical and biological engineering in Seoul National University, Korea,
in 2007.
He is an Assistant Professor in the Department
of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering at
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea.
He was a Postdoctoral Associate at the Mechanobiology Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. His
research interests include the micro/nano system-based microstructures for artificial organs and biomedical devices.

147

Sang-Hoon Lee (M’96) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea, in 1983, 1987, and 1992,
respectively.
From 1985 to 1992, he was a Researcher in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National
University Hospital. From 2006, he was a Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Dankook University. In 2002, he was a Visiting Scientist in the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. He is currently a Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. His current
research interests include the development of cell on a chip, micro tissue engineering and bioartificial organ, design, and development of microfluidic devices
for biomedical applications and flexible implantable sensor for U-healthcare
system, and brain-to-machine interface.

