IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

973

Improving Reliability of Monitoring Background
EEG Dynamics in Asphyxiated Infants
Vladimir Matić∗ , Perumpillichira J. Cherian, Katrien Jansen, Ninah Koolen, Gunnar Naulaers,
Renate M. Swarte, Paul Govaert, Sabine Van Huffel, and Maarten De Vos

Abstract—The goal of this study is to develop an automated algorithm to quantify background electroencephalography (EEG)
dynamics in term neonates with hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy.
The recorded EEG signal is adaptively segmented and the segments with low amplitudes are detected. Next, depending on the
spatial distribution of the low-amplitude segments, the first part
of the algorithm detects (dynamic) interburst intervals (dIBIs) and
performs well on the relatively artifact-free EEG periods and welldefined burst-suppression EEG periods. However, on testing the
algorithm on EEG recordings of more than 48 h per neonate, a
significant number of misclassified and dubious detections were
encountered. Therefore, as the next step, we applied machine
learning classifiers to differentiate between definite dIBI detections and misclassified ones. The developed algorithm achieved a
true positive detection rate of 98%, 97%, 88%, and 95% for four
duration-related dIBI groups that we subsequently defined. We
benchmarked our algorithm with an expert diagnostic interpretation of EEG periods (1 h long) and demonstrated its effectiveness
in clinical practice. We show that the detection algorithm effectively discriminates challenging cases encountered within mild and
moderate background abnormalities. The dIBI detection algorithm improves identification of neonates with good clinical outcome as compared to the classification based on the classical burstsuppression interburst interval.
Index Terms—Background electroencephalography (EEG), interburst interval detection, neonatal asphyxia, support vector
machine (SVM), wavelets.

Manuscript received May 5, 2015; revised August 7, 2015; accepted August 31, 2015. Date of publication September 14, 2015; date of current version
May 19, 2016. This work was supported by the Research Council KUL: CoE
PFV/10/002 (OPTEC); IWT: projects: TBM 110697-NeoGuard. The work of V.
Matic was supported in part by the IWT Postdoc grant. iMinds Medical Information Technologies SBO 2015, the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office: IUAP
P7/19/ (DYSCO, ‘Dynamical systems, control and optimization’, 2012–2017),
and the European Research Council: ERC Advanced Grant: BIOTENSORS (n°
339804). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ V. Matić is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven,
Leuven 3000, Belgium, and also with iMinds Medical IT Department, Leuven
3000, Belgium (e-mail: Vladimir.Matic@esat.kuleuven.be).
P. J. Cherian is with the Section of Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of
Neurology, Erasmus MC.
K. Jansen is with the Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital
Gasthuisberg.
N. Koolen and S. Van Huffel are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, and also with iMinds Medical IT Department.
G. Naulaers is with the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital
Gasthuisberg.
R. M. Swarte and P. Govaert are with the Department of Neonatology, Sophia
Children’s Hospital, Erasmus MC.
M. De Vos is with the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of
Engineering, University of Oxford.
This paper contains supplemental material available online at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 1 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2477946

I. INTRODUCTION
ERINATAL hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) is a
major cause of morbidity and mortality in newborns [1].
Common neurodevelopmental sequelae in survivors include
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and sensory and cognitive problems
[2], [3]. In clinical care of asphyxiated neonates, it is necessary
to accurately assess the degree of HIE severity. It is known that
clinical neurological examination and cerebral ultrasound perform poorly in this regard. Electroencephalography (EEG) is
a widely available noninvasive bed-side test that is exquisitely
sensitive for studying abnormalities of the brain function and
its recovery in neonatal HIE [4]–[6]. However, the use of continuous EEG (cEEG) monitoring in the Neonatal Intensive Care
Units has been limited due to lack of around-the-clock support to
interpret this complex signal. Hence, there is an urgent need for
the development of real-time systems to automatically quantify
neonatal background EEG activity.
The assessment of EEG signals and their dynamic changes
enables accurate prognostication in two extreme categories of
neonatal HIE. More specifically, the mildest forms of HIE, characterized by normal or mildly disturbed EEG background with
preserved sleep-wake cycles are associated with a good clinical
outcome. In contrast, severe HIE, characterized by persistent
nonresponsive burst-suppression pattern (e.g., Interburst intervals, IBIs>10–20 s) and the absence of sleep-wake cycles (at
48 h postpartum) is associated with a poor clinical outcome
[7]–[9]. However, compared to these two extreme groups, clinical and EEG assessment of mild and moderate neonatal HIE is
challenging.
In clinical practice, to visually score the severity of abnormality of the EEG background in encephalopathic neonates, EEG
discontinuity is the most commonly used parameter [7], [9].
This pattern is recognized as higher voltage “bursts” of cerebral
activity interrupted by lower voltage “interbursts” [10]. The IBI
in neonatal EEG is defined broadly as a pattern with peakto-peak amplitude <25–50 μV. Within this definition, three
IBI patterns are identified in full-term neonates: 1) tracé alternant (TA-IBI>25 μV)—an EEG pattern present within the
quiet sleep stage in healthy newborns; 2) tracé discontinue (TDIBI<25 μV)—a pattern in neonates with mild and moderate
HIE; and 3) burst-suppression (BS-IBI<5–10 μV)—a pattern
in neonates with severe HIE [10]. In the literature, the IBI pattern is usually associated with the classical BS-IBI, defined as a
pattern without variability within the suppressed interval. Therefore, a simple amplitude definition threshold is commonly applied: interburst amplitude <5–10 μV [7, 11]. On the other hand,
mild and moderate EEG discontinuities (e.g., tracé discontinue:

P

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

974

TD-IBI) cannot be characterized with such a restrictive definition due to much higher IBI amplitude variability [7] and, thus,
their automated detection is more challenging.
Recently, several studies have proposed automated methods
to assess the grade of background EEG abnormality in 1-h-long
epochs in neonates with HIE. In [12], a combination of quantified EEG (qEEG) features such as EEG discontinuity, amplitude,
and frequency content were found useful to assess the severity
of HIE in full-term neonates. However, this approach was not
successful in differentiating mild from moderate EEG background abnormalities. In addition, other studies have presented
algorithms for the detection of BS-IBIs in full term (with severe
HIE and IBIs>10 s) and premature neonates (EEG consists of
simplified burst-suppression patterns) [13]–[17]. These methods use a nonlinear transformation of the EEG signal, followed
by a thresholding operator. For instance, the nonlinear energy
operator (NLEO), line length, and envelope of the signal are
computed on the raw EEG, which are subsequently thresholded.
The values above the threshold correspond to bursts, whereas
lower values determine the suppressed periods.
However, the quantification of mild and moderate background
EEG abnormalities faces three major problems that are not addressed with the previously described automated approaches.
First, complex EEG background patterns are often encountered,
which consist of varying degrees of EEG amplitude attenuation. Usually, discontinuous EEG periods are intermixed and
alternate with continuous EEG periods. As a result, such EEGs
cannot be categorized into a simple dichotomy of either burst
or suppression patterns as done in neonates with severe HIE
or premature neonates. Second, neonatal HIE is not static and
EEG background activity evolves over time. At present, there is
no automated method which has been developed to quantify the
evolution (improvement/deterioration) of the EEG background
over longer periods of time (24–48 h). For instance, recovery of
severely abnormal EEG background is characterized by a progressive shortening of BS-IBIs and increase in the amplitude
of the suppressed periods and change in burst amplitudes [5],
i.e., in newborns recovering from HIE, EEGs gradually become
more continuous, whereas IBIs evolve from burst-suppression
patterns to tracé discontinue and further to tracé alternant patterns. Due to the evolution of encephalopathy, an automated
method designed to detect only severe EEG discontinuity (e.g.,
IBI>10–20 s) will no longer function accurately. Third, it is
known that the EEG signal is very vulnerable to a various artifacts. Hence, it is important to differentiate whether the output
of the thresholding algorithm is an accurate quantification of
real burst-suppression-burst complexes or a false detection due
to artifacts.
This paper will focus on the detection of definite EEG discontinuities, viz., classical burst-suppression as well as a range
of tracé discontinues patterns that express higher interburst amplitudes. We will show that the traditional definition of EEG
discontinuity is suboptimal as there is an intrinsic dependence
on the duration and the amplitude of the suppressed EEG patterns. This insight will allow us to monitor the evolution of
the brain injury and to better model EEG discontinuity, thereby
analyzing IBIs with respect to their duration. For this purpose,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

we will call the patterns analyzed in this study “dynamic interburst intervals (dIBIs),” thereby taking into consideration both
the amplitude and the duration of the EEG discontinuity that
can evolve over the course of EEG monitoring. Moreover, by
detecting definite dIBIs and discarding dubious detections, we
develop a system that can be regarded as trustworthy and consistent with a diagnostic interpretation by EEG experts. In addition,
we show that using the new algorithm to detect dIBIs, we significantly improve the characterization of neonates with milder
encephalopathy and good outcome as compared to a traditionally used classical BS-IBI parameter.
II. METHODS
A. Patients
The 53 neonates included in this study were part of a larger
cohort of 119 full-term newborns who underwent continuous
polygraphic video EEG monitoring (cEEG) as part of a prospective study that evaluated the utility of cEEG monitoring in term
neonates with perinatal asphyxia (from March 2003 till August
2007). All EEG data were recorded at the Sophia Children’s
Hospital, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. The study had the approval of the Erasmus MC
Medical Ethical Review Board. Informed consent was obtained
from the parents/guardians prior to the start of the registration.
The inclusion criteria for EEG monitoring were clinical features
of encephalopathy and having at least one of the following features of birth asphyxia: 1) arterial pH of umbilical cord blood
ࣘ7.1, and 2) Apgar score ࣘ5 at 5 min. Babies with congenital cardiac abnormalities and multiple congenital anomalies
were excluded [18] as well as infants with constantly isoelectric
background EEG. This dataset has been used in our recent publications [19]–[21]. The EEG sampling frequency was 256 Hz.
The recordings were started 2–48 (median 19) h postpartum,
using a set of 17 EEG electrodes, whereas in some patients, a
reduced set of 13 electrodes was used. All EEG signals were filtered using high-pass and low-pass FIR filters at 0.7 and 20 Hz,
respectively.
B. Datasets
The full dataset was split into three nonoverlapping groups.
Dataset DA consists of 157 h of cEEG segments from seven
neonates with mild and moderate background EEG abnormalities. This dataset was used to optimize the algorithm’s parameters for the detection of suppressed intervals (dIBI candidates).
Dataset DB consists of cEEG data from 38 neonates. It
was used to improve modeling of milder EEG discontinuities
and to optimize the refinement postprocessing step. cEEGs of
1-h duration were selected exactly one hour after the beginning
of the recording. We did not exclude EEG segments due to the
presence of artifacts or epileptic seizures (n = 18). The expressed EEG background patterns in this group included mild,
moderate, and severe abnormalities.
Dataset DC consists of eight neonates with predominantly
mild and moderate EEG background abnormalities and was
used for the validation of the overall system. We used this

MATIĆ et al.: IMPROVING RELIABILITY OF MONITORING BACKGROUND EEG DYNAMICS IN ASPHYXIATED INFANTS

Fig. 1. Classical burst suppression pattern detected in the early stage of the
EEG recording. Segments are colored in blue, if the peak-to-peak amplitude of
the segment is less than 20 μV.

selection of data for the validation because it is most challenging to accurately detect mild and moderate EEG discontinuities
(3 s<dIBI<10–15 s). From each neonate, 30 min of EEG was
randomly selected for the analysis.
The visual background grading was performed by an experienced clinical neurophysiologist (PJC), blinded to the clinical
details of the neonates. A three-level EEG grading was adapted
from Murray et al. [9] as follows: 1) normal/mild (IBIs<5 s;
poorly organized sleep-wake cycle; recovered, continuous background EEG), 2) moderate (5 sࣘ IBIs< 10 s), and 3) severe
(10 s ࣘ IBIs< 60 s; dominated by prolonged and marked
suppressions).
C. Exploratory Definition Of dIBI
In this study, our goal is to develop a system for long-term
EEG monitoring of neonatal HIE. Typically, background activity in HIE is characterized by both classical BS-IBI patterns (see
Fig. 1) as well as TD-IBIs (<25 μV; Fig. 2). Hence, an ideal
quantification would detect both related patterns into a single
parameter. The first pattern, burst-suppression-burst complex,
is commonly encountered during the initial phase of asphyxia
(severe background EEG abnormalities). The second one commonly emerges from classical IBIs after 12–48 h of monitoring
in patients showing recovery (mild and moderate background
EEG abnormalities). To encompass both severe and mild EEG
discontinuous patterns into a unified parameter, we introduce the
term dIBI. The word dynamic suggests that EEG discontinuity
is characterized with a single parameter despite the fact that interburst amplitude (and overall dIBI morphology) significantly
evolves during the recovery/deterioration of hypoxic injuries.
The remaining discontinuous EEG patterns, with interburst

975

Fig. 2. Detected tracé discontinue patterns with higher interburst amplitudes
that evolved over 24 h from patterns shown in Fig. 1.

amplitude >25–50 μV (e.g., tracé alternant) as well as continuous and ambiguous EEG patterns with amplitudes <25 μV
are not included into dIBI definition.
Here, we use measures of not only duration (as traditionally
done), but also a measure of the dIBI amplitude to characterize
EEG background. Therefore, the assessment of the amplitude,
not affected by artifacts, needs to be calculated within definite
dIBI detections, thereby providing a trustworthy measure.
Our automated approach is developed to first detect attenuated periods of burst-suppression-burst complexes (which we
refer to as dIBI candidates). Subsequently, we quantify several
features for each dIBI candidate that allow us to distinguish
between definite dIBIs and those expressing artifacts/seizures
(misclassified—see Figs. 4 and 5). This postprocessing of dIBI
candidates is crucial for reliable background quantification. In
addition, it may happen that EEG is both highly variable and
attenuated, and that visual interpretation of IBI duration is quite
challenging. In such cases (see Fig. 3), we say that the EEG
is ambiguous. Without the refinement step, falsely prolonged
detections may appear and jeopardize the automated diagnostic grading of the severity of encephalopathy (see Figs. 3 and
6). This is commonly encountered in cases when the EEG is
evolving from tracé discontinue patterns to normal (continuous)
background EEG and an automated system can falsely classify a
recovering neonate as being very sick. In order to decide whether
a dIBI candidate should be included into further statistics or not,
we will train machine-learning classifiers for this task.
D. Detection of dIBI Candidates
To detect suppressed periods, EEG channels are independently adaptively segmented with an algorithm proposed in [22].
The main goal of the segmentation step is to distinguish and

976

Fig. 3. Ambiguous EEG pattern occurring close proximity in time to the
patterns in Fig. 2. These types of detection were excluded as they do not express
clearly distinguishable burst-suppression-burst complexes.

Fig. 4. Examples of false-positive dIBI detections that are produced by epileptic seizure activity over T5 and P3 electrodes.

separate locally suppressed EEG periods from burst periods
[see Fig. 7(A1)]; [23]. Subsequently, we classify segments into
the low-amplitude class (L) if the segments’ “peak-to-peak” amplitude is below 20μV [see Fig. 7(A2)]; for more details, see
[23].
To detect globally suppressed EEG periods after the segmentation/classification step, we monitor the spatial and temporal
distribution of low-amplitude segments across EEG channels.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 5. Artifact interrupts the suppressed interval, thereby falsely shortening
dIBI duration and amplitude assessment. Instead of a single longer dIBI, two
shorter dIBI candidates are falsely detected.

Fig. 6. Bursts with very low amplitudes (“peak to peak” < 20 μV) are missed
by the detection algorithm, producing falsely prolonged dIBI detection.

To accomplish this, we count the number of EEG channels expressing low-amplitude segments at a particular time instant
[see Fig. 7(A3)]. This results in a new signal, which we call
low-amplitude temporal profile (LTP). Consequently, we define
a dIBI candidate if the LTP signal exceeds half of the total
number of EEG channels for more than 3 s. This results in
a large number of static detections, which can be either definite dIBIs or misclassified dIBIs that fulfill the thresholding

MATIĆ et al.: IMPROVING RELIABILITY OF MONITORING BACKGROUND EEG DYNAMICS IN ASPHYXIATED INFANTS

977

Fig. 8. Two transitioning points (vertical lines, above [red] and below [blue])
are illustrated for milder EEG discontinuity (dIBI<10 s; left) and for severe
EEG discontinuity (dIBI>10 s; right). Note that for the shorter dIBI amplitude
of the suppressed part shows more variability and the transitioning point is more
challenging to be validated. On the other hand, longer dIBI (classical burstsuppression) shows nonresponsive amplitude, thereby making recognition of
definite dIBIs much easier.

Fig. 7. Three main steps for the detection of the suppressed EEG intervals
(dIBI candidates) are illustrated. (A1) Adaptive segmentation of the EEG is
done. Maximum values of the “TD” signal define EEG segment boundaries
(see [23]). (A2) Classification of short segments into low amplitude class is
done. (A3) Spatial distribution of the low-amplitude segments is calculated.
This signal, LTP is thresholded (red horizontal line) and dIBI candidates are
detected (marked with black rectangle).

requirements. Examples of definite detections are given in Figs.
1 and 2, whereas misclassified dIBIs are shown in Figs. 3–6.
E. Reliable Detection of Definite dIBIs
The algorithm uses machine-learning techniques to distinguish definite and misclassified dIBI detections. For every detected dIBI candidate, a set of parameters is calculated that
quantifies dIBI detection certainty. Thirteen parameters are implemented as a heuristic translation of visual analysis done by
an experienced PJC while assessing whether dIBI candidates
are definite or dubious (misclassified) dIBIs. These parameters
quantify in a mathematical way the level of dIBI amplitude,
the number of EEG channels that show suppression, the largest
duration of suppression along a single channel, and the presence (existence) of borderline bursts for a detected suppressed
period. In Fig. 8 for two dIBI detections (upper traces), we illustrate how one of the features, the presence of borderline bursts,
is examined. For this purpose, we used the discrete wavelet
transform (DWT), which is suitable for the detection of a transitioning point (see Fig. 8 lower traces). Wavelet coefficients
at the decomposition level 2–5 (4–32 Hz mainly) are expected
to have higher absolute values for burst periods as compared
to suppressed periods (flat EEG or very smooth oscillations).
Next, we compare 3 s of the burst part versus the 3 s of the
suppressed interval. The majority of large absolute wavelet coefficients values if contained within the burst part would imply
the accurate detection of a transitioning point. For instance, this
will be the case for the definite dIBIs in Figs. 1 and 2, but less
likely for the dubiously detected transitions in Figs. 3–6. For
the full mathematical definitions of all 13 parameters, see the
Appendix.

Fig. 9. Amplitude distribution of definite dIBIs is depicted for each dIBI
duration group. Group I: 3 sࣘdIBI<5 s; Group II: 5 sࣘdIBI<10 s; Group III:
10 sࣘdIBI<20 s; Group IV: 20ࣘdIBI (<40 s). A one-way ANOVA test with
Bonferroni correction showed a significant difference in the mean amplitude
distribution (F-statistic = 337.8, p<0.001).

Furthermore, due to encountered differences in dIBI morphology with respect to its duration, we suggest categorizing all
definite dIBIs into four duration-related groups as follows (1):
⎧
group I,
3s ≤ dIBI < 5s
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ group II, 5s ≤ dIBI < 10s
dIBI =
.
(1)
⎪
group III, 10s ≤ dIBI < 20s
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
group IV, 20s ≤ dIBI(< 60)
We can see that shorter definite dIBIs have higher amplitude, whereas longer ones show more suppressed amplitude
(see Fig. 9). This amplitude-duration interdependence enables
enhanced modeling of EEG discontinuity.

978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

The 18802 detected dIBIs were visually checked for precise
burst/suppression transitioning in each channel and for accurate
detection of dIBI duration. This meticulous evaluation of
EEG discontinuity patterns enabled us to optimally set and
fix the parameters of the algorithm for the detection of dIBI
candidates. We do not present statistics for this dataset as it was
used for the tuning of the processing algorithm. Nevertheless,
although we improved our initial version of the algorithm ([23];
average rate of misclassified dIBIs was 30–50%), the false
positive detection rate remained unacceptably high.
B. Dataset DB

Fig. 10. Flowchart of the algorithm for automated detection of definite dIBIs.
The detected dIBI candidate is parameterized and obtained values are used as
classifiers’ input feature vectors. To optimally account for diverse durationrelated dIBI morphological differences, four different LS-SVM classifiers are
independently optimized. They make a decision whether a dIBI candidate is
definite dIBI and whether it should be used for EEG quantification. Uncertain
detections are excluded from further EEG analysis as misclassified dIBIs.

Next, the parameters that quantify dIBI candidates are used
as input feature vectors into least-squares support vector machine (LS-SVM) classifiers [24]. Initially, we optimized only
one LS-SVM classifier. However, shorter dIBIs with higher interburst amplitudes were more challenging for the classification
than longer dIBIs (data not shown). Therefore, four LS-SVM
classifiers are used to enhance the classification accuracy and
to adjust the algorithm to the dynamic changes/evolution of the
EEG discontinuity (TD-IBIs are shorter with higher amplitude
compared to BS-IBIs). The state flow of the complete algorithm
is illustrated in Fig. 10.
The objective of the classifiers is to estimate whether a
newly detected dIBI is definite—{1} or misclassified—{0}. To
optimize classifiers, four mutually exclusive training datasets
were created depending on dIBI duration by randomly selecting 80% of dIBIs. The remaining 20% of dIBIs from each
group were used to test the corresponding LS-SVM classifiers.
The LS-SVMlab v1.8 toolbox implementation was used in this
study (www.esat.kuleuven.be/sista/lssvmlab, [25]). In all cases,
a Gaussian kernel was applied. Tuning of the parameters was
conducted in two steps. First, coupled simulated annealing was
performed [26] and afterward, a second optimization procedure (simplex) was applied to perform a fine-tuning step. The
fivefold cross-validation misclassification error was used as an
optimization criterion.
III. RESULTS
A. Dataset DA
The initial detection algorithm, including adaptive segmentation, amplitude-based classification, and dIBI detection,
was optimized using a training dataset DA. In total, 157 h
of cEEG from seven neonates was processed and analyzed.

A test dataset DB is processed with the algorithm to further study definite, correctly detected dIBIs. Using the initial
algorithm, 4408 dIBI candidates were detected within 38 h of
cEEG. After visual checking of these detections, 2273 dIBIs
were marked as definite dIBIs, whereas 2135 dIBIs were excluded from further analysis as misclassified (false positive and
dubious ones).
Subsequently, LS-SVM classifiers were trained to optimally
match the visual classification done by the PJC. The total number of dIBIs per duration group was: 1239 (3 sࣘdIBI<5 s), 1382
(5 sࣘdIBI<10 s), 881 (10 sࣘdIBI<20 s), and 906 (dIBIࣙ20 s).
The performance of the classifiers is illustrated using receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves (see Figs. S1 A-D in
the supplemental data). High area under the ROC curve values (AUC) are achieved for all four classifiers: 0.91, 0.94,
0.94, and 0.97, implying that high discrimination between definite and misclassified dIBIs has been achieved. The highest
AUC was achieved for the class with longest dIBIs (BS-IBI),
which implies that these dIBIs have a more definite (simpler)
morphology.
Next, it is important to show how four classifiers would work
in the clinical practice. The working points of the ROC curves
are selected using the “rate of misclassification” error criteria
(see Figs. B1 A-D). We show the percentage of true positive and
false positive detections after the refinement step (see Fig. 11).
We can see that large number of definite dIBI detections will
be kept after the refinement step, which is essential for further
statistical analysis (e.g., median dIBI; histogram). Furthermore,
the false positive detection rate has decreased per dIBI duration
group from (61%, 44%, 36%, and 55%) to (28%, 17%, 14%,
and 16%), respectively.
C. Validation of the Complete Algorithm
To illustrate how powerful the complete algorithm is, the validation results are shown in an independent validation dataset
DC. First, an experienced clinical pediatric neurologist visually marked dIBIs, allowing higher dIBI amplitude as compared
to BS-IBIs and excluding detections whose duration was difficult to be interpreted. Next, the EEGs were processed with
the automated algorithm and the results were compared. Table I illustrates that after detection of dIBI candidates without
the postprocessing step, good results have been obtained, but the
number of misclassifications was rather high as compared to the
EEG expert. After the postprocessing step, and the analysis of

MATIĆ et al.: IMPROVING RELIABILITY OF MONITORING BACKGROUND EEG DYNAMICS IN ASPHYXIATED INFANTS

Fig. 11. For each of the four duration-related dIBI groups (as defined in Fig 9)
in dataset DB, the first bar (A) represents the distribution (%) of automatically
detected definite dIBIs (blue, true positives) and misclassified ones (red, false
positives) compared to the visual marking by the PJC. After the refinement step
using LS-SVM classifiers, a reliable subset (B{1 } ) of dIBIs is generated for
each group, resulting in a significant improvement in the percentage of definite
dIBIs.

TABLE I
RESULTS OF AUTOMATED DEFINITE DIBI DETECTIONS IN A NEW DATASET DC
AS COMPARED TO THE VISUAL SCORING
dIBI
group

Detected
dIBI
candidates

Definite dIBIs
marked by
the rater

I
II
III
IV
Total

280
330
169
56
835

189
254
126
32
601

True positive rate
after the
refinement step

False positive rate
after the
refinement step

125/128
202/209
90/102
19/20
436/459

3/91
7/76
12/43
1/24
23/234

(98%)
(97%)
(88%)
(95%)
(95%)

(3%)
(9%)
(28%)
(4%)
(10%)

First, the algorithm detected dIBI candidates (both definite and misclassified) and
this is presented in the second column. The number of visually scored definite dIBIs
is presented in the third column. After the refinement step, the algorithm retains
definite dIBIs which are compared with the visual scoring. The true-positive rate (%)
is presented in the fourth column, whereas the false-positive rate (%) is presented in
the fifth column. The results are presented for four dIBI duration groups and the total
number of detections is given.

definite dIBIs, high true positive rates are achieved : 98%, 97%,
88%, and 95%, while the false-positive rate remained very low,
demonstrating the high reliability of the algorithm.
D. Benchmarking: dIBI Duration and Amplitude Versus
Expert Visual Background EEG Scoring
The main objective of our automated system is to apply it as an
assistive decision-support system to assess the severity of EEG
background discontinuity. Here, we show the results of fully
automated processing of cEEG epochs within dataset DB (38
neonates). From each neonate, we equidistantly selected four
1-h cEEG segments across the whole EEG recording (minimum
distance between segments longer than 4 h). An experienced
PJC visually assessed background EEG of these neonates. The
EEG from some neonates cannot be described with only one
class due to evolution of the background activity. For instance,
the background EEG abnormalities of a neonate with recovering

979

Fig. 12. Output of the complete algorithm is compared with the background
EEG abnormalities visually graded by a PJC. Median duration and amplitude of
definite dIBIs detected within 1 h of cEEG are plotted as a single data point (four
data points per neonate). Background EEG abnormality of the corresponding
1-h epoch is scored by the PJC as mild (blue), moderate (red), or severe (black).

HIE may be graded as: severe (21–22 h postpartum-PP), severe
(27–28 h PP), moderate (33–34 h PP), and mild (39–40 h PP).
Furthermore, within each 1-h EEG segment, median duration
and median amplitude of dIBIs were automatically calculated
to characterize the trend of the EEG background activity. This
is shown in Fig. 12, where each data point corresponds to a 1-h
cEEG segment (four data points per neonate).
Next, we calculated the Spearman correlation coefficient
between background EEG grades and median dIBI duration
(ρ = 0.3718, p < 0.001) and between background EEG grades
and median dIBI amplitude (ρ = −0.449, p < 0.001). Introducing dIBI amplitude as a feature, we enhanced the separation
between the classes compared to the use of only duration of
dIBIs. In particular, this can be observed in the separation between mild and moderate classes. Therefore, incorporating a
trustworthy measure of dIBI amplitude enabled high agreement
with background EEG scores as done by the PJC.
At this stage, during the development phase of the algorithm,
we have restricted ourselves to median dIBI duration and amplitude, and do not aim to perform comprehensive automatic
grading (classification) of the background EEG activity. For the
latter, many other parameters need to be taken into account such
as frequency content, morphology and variability of EEG bursts,
sleep-wake cycles, EEG symmetry, synchrony, and presence of
sharp waves.
IV. DISCUSSION
The goal of this study was to develop an automated method
for a reliable assessment of a broad range of background EEG
discontinuities in full-term asphyxiated neonates. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study that used an automated
method to study EEGs over long monitoring hours and to accurately detect milder EEG discontinuities. These patterns are
predominantly encountered in neonates diagnosed with mild and
moderate HIE. This subgroup of HIE neonates still represents
a great challenge for clinicians aiming to standardize a visual
grading system for their systematic study and to predict their

980

neurodevelopmental outcome [31]. In this context, we defined
a new, visually interpretable parameter, dIBI, as an extension of
the classical BS-IBI concept. In general, dIBI can be seen as a
burst-suppression-burst pattern with evolving activity encountered during both the suppressed and burst periods. In addition,
apart from temporal information, the novelty of dIBI is that it
incorporates various interburst amplitude levels.
The postprocessing step, estimates diverse dIBI amplitude
values, and accordingly, we optimized four LS-SVM classifiers.
In this way, we improved the detection accuracy compared to
the use of only one classifier. It is also noteworthy that not only
the amplitude, but also the overall dIBI morphology is different
depending on duration. For instance, for dIBIs<10 s, the transition points of burst/suppression are milder and more gradual. In
contrast, burst/suppression alternations for dIBIs>20 s are much
more pronounced and abrupt. Last but not the least, the postprocessing step enables analysis of a wide range of encountered
discontinuous background EEG states in neonates with HIE.
Hence, manual data preselection by clinicians is not needed and
the algorithm can be used for long-term continuous monitoring. In contrast, some of the published algorithms are developed to process and tackle only markedly discontinuous/burstsuppression EEG states [13], [14], [17]. With our algorithm,
milder “discontinuous” tracé alternant pattern and continuous
EEG patterns can be processed as well without affecting the
algorithm’s performance.
Few research groups have attempted to develop methods for
automated grading of background EEG abnormalities in fullterm asphyxiated neonates. A notable contribution are the literature works [13] and [27], where a method for suppression/burst
detection has been developed. As the first step, the method first
detects “burst-suppression” states and then quantifies the background EEG with an IBI detector. However, mild to moderate
EEG discontinuities were not analyzed in those studies, which
is a significant limitation. Moreover, for the development of
their method, the researchers included only a small number
of neonates (six), expressing only prolonged BS-IBIs (>10 s)
[27]. In a follow-up validation study of this method [28] in
21 neonates, a highly dichotomous separation of neonates into
“good” and “poor” outcome groups has been achieved using
detected median IBI values. It is surprising that none of the
neonates showed recovery and evolution of background EEG
(although nine were clinically judged to have mild-moderate
HIE and later had good clinical outcomes). On the other hand,
our algorithm is able to ascertain a continuous and gradual
transition of background EEG states as we have implemented
detection of milder discontinuities as well.
Other automated detection methods have studied
“burst/suppression” patterns in premature EEG [14]–[17].
Compared to these, the dIBI parameter includes more complex
burst-suppression-burst patterns, thereby encompassing a
broader range of EEG discontinuities. In addition, the number of dIBI patterns that we analyzed is at least ten times
higher, covering many more hours of EEG recordings. The
aforementioned methods can be compared with the first part
of our algorithm for detection of dIBI candidates. They are all
designed to “threshold” either suppressed or burst EEG periods.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

However, these studies have not addressed and explored the
adverse effects of artifacts/seizures that can interrupt the
suppressed periods and be erroneously detected as bursts. In
addition, we aimed to identify a large set of correctly detected
definite dIBIs that would be confirmed with high interrater
agreement. As part of this strategy, uncertain and ambiguous
EEG patterns would be excluded, reducing significantly the
number of misclassified detections.
Due to recovery of brain injury and background EEG evolution in mild and moderate HIE, dIBIs significantly change in
morphology and makes detection rather challenging. At the beginning of the recordings (<24 h postpartum), burst periods
tend to be low in amplitude (e.g., pure theta activity <10–
20 μV [6]), with extremely attenuated suppressed segments.
When the EEG background improves along with recovery from
HIE, the amplitude of both suppressed and active burst periods
would increase, whereas the duration of dIBIs would decrease.
Hence, the encountered scenarios may include bursts registered
at 12-h postpartum that are lower in amplitude than suppression segments at 48-h postpartum. This will result in an overlap
between suppression/burst periods at various time points that
static burst/suppression detection algorithms will not be able to
distinguish. For instance, qEEG parameters (mainly amplitude
based) used for supervised learning (e.g., [13]) will be insensitive to detect such changes in EEG morphology. In contrast,
dIBI candidates are detected with high sensitivity and the presence of borderline bursts is examined afterward. Here, the algorithm compares how burst/suppression patterns are relatively
distinguishable regardless of their amplitude values (see parameter transitioning in the Appendix). Subsequently, as dIBIs
become shorter with higher amplitude activity visible during
suppressions, a corresponding duration-related LS-SVM classifier would be applied to classify them as definite dIBIs. Approaches presented in [13]–[15] are not sensitive to the evolution
of background EEG activity. On the other hand, our method is
adaptable to dynamic changes in the background EEG, which
is a distinct advantage.
In [12], authors proposed a method to quantify background
EEG without direct assessment of EEG discontinuity. The authors showed that a combination of qEEG features can be applied to assess background EEG abnormality as determined by
experienced PJCs within 1-h segments of EEG. The method is
designed to replicate experts’ grading of HIE severity, resulting in a single-output value. Generally, this value represents a
grade from 1 to 4 (mild, moderate, severe, or isoelectric), which
helps to partly replace visual EEG classification. However, this
output, which uses a combination of many qEEG features, does
not reveal new insights into the various characteristics of EEG
discontinuity in neonatal HIE. In contrast, our automated output
offers more insight than just four discrete values. Therefore, the
speed of EEG improvement/deterioration can be evaluated more
effectively using a dIBI amplitude-duration plot. For instance,
a neonate who is recovering from severe HIE could be initially simply be graded as 3 (severe) according to the approach
described by Korotchikova [12], whereas in dIBI amplitudeduration plot (see Fig. 12), we will be able to observe progressive dIBI duration shortening and amplitude increase. In other

MATIĆ et al.: IMPROVING RELIABILITY OF MONITORING BACKGROUND EEG DYNAMICS IN ASPHYXIATED INFANTS

words, our method enables finer monitoring of the speed of the
HIE recovery, which is known to be a very important clinical
parameter. Moreover, it is also difficult to estimate how the proposed systems [12] would tackle many hindrances like artifacts
and seizures, which were manually excluded in that study. According to the authors, the EEG datasets were preselected and
represent ideal-like scenarios with consistent background EEG
grades. Compared to this study, our dataset included major artifacts and electrographic seizures, and used nonpreselected EEG
segments, representing real-life scenarios.
By introducing the concept of dIBI amplitude measure, we
achieved better background EEG quantification compared to
the classical BS-IBI. According to our analysis, BS-IBI was
mainly suited for quantifying EEGs in neonates expressing severe background abnormalities and poor clinical outcome [18].
On the other hand, neonates recovering from HIE with improving background EEG lacked a suitable quantified parameter for their characterization. Here, we have shown that dIBI
can accurately quantify milder background EEG discontinuities. Neonates persistently showing these milder EEG abnormalities had no thalamus-basal ganglia injuries on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and, subsequently, had good clinical outcomes [18]. In addition, our findings corroborate the
results of previous studies that visually studied amplitude differences in discontinuous EEG patterns in full-term neonates
with HIE. Pezzani [6] analyzed EEG recordings within the first
24 h of life and found that neonates with HIE and nonresponsive EEG suppressed intervals (<5 μV) died or developed severe sequelae. In contrast, infants expressing higher interburst
amplitudes of 5–10μV survived without any sequelae. In another study [29], researchers analyzed suppressed EEG intervals
in term neonates with HIE and their relationship with clinical
outcome. In particular, they defined classical BS-IBI with the
amplitude consistently <5 μV (n = 15 neonates) and “modified BS-IBI” expressing higher interburst amplitude >5 μV
(n = 8 neonates). The neonates expressing “modified BS-IBI”
showed more favorable outcome compared to the BS-IBI group.
In another study [7], the authors analyzed discontinuous EEG
intervals that could not be classified as classical BS-IBIs. This
study included neonates with HIE up to seven days postpartum,
and, therefore, their findings cannot be directly compared with
ours. However, the expressed trends appear to be similar, and
higher interburst amplitudes implied a more favorable clinical
outcome.
V. CONCLUSION
Finally, even though our definition of dIBI incorporates amplitude and duration, and takes into account the various types of
transitioning between bursts and dIBIs, it could be argued that
an attempt to represent a complex and chaotic signal like EEG
with a single parameter is fundamentally flawed. However, in
encephalopathic neonates, we would expect a relative simplification of EEG patterns, resulting in discontinuity of the EEG and
the appearance of definite dIBIs which would be detected by our
automated system. Since our aim with automated dIBI detection
is to develop a method to grade HIE, and monitor its evolution in
neonatal encephalopathy and not to encapsulate the entire range

981

of complexities of the EEG signal from normal to abnormal, we
feel that our approach is justified. Furthermore, the advantage of
our refinement step is that it selects only highly certain dIBI detections, which would have very good interrater agreement. To
further investigate the potential of the dIBI parameter for scoring background EEG abnormalities and its prognostic value, it
is necessary to perform further multicenter validation studies
with even larger datasets and characterizing patterns of brain
injury on MRI and clinical outcome. This analysis could also
lead to a widely acceptable EEG background grading system
in HIE using data-driven rules and become an important aid in
guiding treatment decisions.
APPENDIX
FRAMEWORK FOR THE RELIABILITY PARAMETERIZATION
OF DIBI
To distinguish definite dIBI detections according to the detection certainty, we parameterize the “burst-suppression-burst”
complex. These parameters are developed to characterize the
classification process done by a PJC to confirm definite dIBIs.
Some of the parameters are optimized to confirm definite dIBIs,
whereas others are adjusted to exclude misclassified dIBI detections. We provide a detailed description of the reliability
parameters and illustrate how they are calculated within the
burst-suppression-burst complex in Fig. 13.
The following parameters are used to parameterize every detected dIBI candidate.
1) Suppression (one parameter) is defined as a single median
value of the rectified EEG signal within the suppressed
dIBI period across all EEG channels.
2) Flatness (four parameters) is calculated for each EEG
channel independently within the suppressed dIBI period. We adjusted two horizontal border lines, so that they
enclose 95% of all EEG samples within the dIBI. The
minimum possible distance between these two horizontal
lines represents the parameter flatness (see Fig. 14). Next,
the flatness is calculated for each EEG channel and the
obtained values are sorted into the ascending order. Subsequently, these values are split into four equal groups.
For each group, a median value is calculated, resulting
into four parameters that estimate the suppression level of
the dIBI.
3) Longest (four parameters) within the dIBI, for each EEG
channel, we calculate the longest interval of the lowamplitude segment (L) classes that are not interrupted
by a higher amplitude activity (see Fig. 13). If several
consecutive low-amplitude segments are present next to
each other, we will merge them into a single one. This
parameter ranges from 0% (no low-amplitude segments)
to 100% (only low-amplitude segments). It is an important descriptor for decisions whether the dIBI suppressed
period is interrupted, especially in cases when higher amplitude EEG activity is distributed randomly across the
suppressed period. Similar to the parameter flatness, we
sort all values calculated for each channel in the ascending
order and calculated four parameters as median value of
the corresponding quartile groups.

982

Fig. 13. Detected dIBI candidate is marked with large black rectangle,
whereas low-amplitude segments (L) are marked with smaller ones. The reliability parameter transitioning examines the dIBI segmentation accuracy and
the certainty of the complete complex burst-suppression-burst. For each channel, 3s of the burst part (red) and 3s of the suppressed part (blue) are compared.
Here, only two such examples are illustrated with red/blue rectangles. In addition, an illustration of the parameter longest is depicted in green. It calculates
the longest possible duration of the consecutive segments with low amplitude
(L) within dIBI. In channel C4-O2, this value is maximal (=1), whereas for
the channel Fp2-T4 this value is 0.5 (50% of the duration of dIBI candidate).
Parameter longest is useful to exclude ambiguous EEG discontinuity and other
uncertain detections.

Fig. 14. Illustration of how the parameter flatness is calculated within the
suppressed dIBI part (4 s long) for a single channel. Two horizontal red lines
are adaptively adjusted until they meet two criteria. First, they need to enclose
95% of the signal samples. Second, the calculated distance between them has
to be minimal. In this example, the calculated distance is 14 μV.

4) Number of channels (one parameter): For the presumed
duration of the dIBI (suppressed part), we calculate the
mean value of the LTP signal. Next, this value (number
of EEG channels expressing LTP signal) is divided with
the total number of (bipolar montage) EEG channels. As
dIBI was thresholded at a value of one more than half the
number of total EEG channels, this parameter will be in
the range from 55% to 100% (0.55–1).
5) Transitioning (two parameters): This parameter examines the presence of bursts and how distinguishable
burst/suppression segments are. Six seconds of the EEG
signal are selected with a center exactly at the detected
burst/suppression transition point. In Fig. 13, burst parts
(red) and suppressed parts (blue) are marked. Next, this

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 15. Transitioning parameter is illustrated for detected EEG discontinuity. The first 3 s of the signal represents a burst period, whereas the last 3 s
corresponds to the suppressed segment (upper plot: purple-original EEG signal,
black-approximated EEG signal). In two lower figures, wavelet coefficients (levels from 2 to 4 are displayed as they carry the largest portion of the signal power)
are depicted in black for zero values, and in white and yellow for larger absolute coefficient values (middle plot). After sparse approximation, large wavelet
coefficients would be retained mainly within the dynamic burst period (bottom
plot). Therefore, in this example, the parameter transitioning (value close to
1) would imply that the vast majority of the high activity is localized within
the left (burst) part of the signal, whereas the right part (suppression) does not
contain any significant component of EEG activity with higher frequencies. In
this way, the high energy coefficients (colored in white) capture the “high activity burst” behavior as compared to the suppressed periods where such activity
is lacking. Therefore, the calculation of the transitioning parameter efficiently
characterizes the presence of distinguishable burst/suppression alternations.

signal is decomposed using the DWT [30]. We applied
Daubechies four mother wavelet and five levels of decompositions. In this way, the burst part (3s) is characterized with wavelet coefficients that express higher absolute
values, whereas the suppressed part (3s) is characterized
with wavelet coefficients close to zero (see Fig. 15, middle
plot). To further enhance the differences between burst and
suppression segments, we sort absolute values of wavelet
coefficients into the ascending order. Then, iteratively,
starting from the smallest values, we set small wavelet coefficient values to zero. We repeat this process while keeping more than 90% of the original signal power within the
remaining wavelet coefficients (see Fig. 15, bottom plot).
In this way, the approximated signal (in Fig. 15, upper
plot—marked in black) preserves the active burst period,
whereas the majority of wavelet coefficients within the
suppressed period are set to zero. The percentage of power

MATIĆ et al.: IMPROVING RELIABILITY OF MONITORING BACKGROUND EEG DYNAMICS IN ASPHYXIATED INFANTS

retained by wavelet coefficients within the burst part compared to the total power of all wavelet coefficients, after
the sparse approximation, determines the transitioning parameter. Furthermore, this parameter is averaged across all
EEG channels. Thus, if the burst/suppression transition
represents a clear cutoff, the value of transitioning parameter is expected to be approximately 90–100%. However,
if this value is around 50–65%, it is doubtful whether a
distinguishable burst/suppression alternation exists. Furthermore, as both transitions, at the beginning and at the
end of the dIBI, are important, we calculate for every dIBI
2 transitioning parameters.
6) NLEO local maxima (one parameter): In some cases,
bursts can occur synchronously with relatively low amplitude (<10–20 μV) and can be missed. Another common
scenario is that a burst is present on less than 50% of EEG
channels. This can produce a false merging of two shorter
dIBIs into a longer one. To examine the presence of potentially missed bursts, we apply a NLEO as a very effective
method for detection of bursts and dynamic EEG activity
[14]. NLEO is calculated using the following formula:
ψ (x [n]) = x2 [n] − x [n − 1] · x [n + 1] .
We calculate an average NLEO across all EEG channels and
use the maximal value of this signal as the final parameter.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the patients and their parents
for their cooperation and the neurotechnologists who made the
high-quality EEG recordings.
REFERENCES
[1] J. E. Lawn, “4 million neonatal deaths: When? Where? Why?” Lancet,
vol. 365, no. 9462, pp. 891–900, Mar. 2005.
[2] B. Hagberg, “Changing panorama of cerebral palsy in Sweden. VIII.
Prevalence and origin in the birth year period 1991–94,” Acta Paediatr.,
vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 271–277, Mar. 2001.
[3] J. H. Richardus, “Differences in perinatal mortality and suboptimal care
between 10 European regions: Results of an international audit,” BJOG:
Int. J. Obstetrics Gynaecol., vol. 110, no. 2, pp. 97–105, Feb. 2003.
[4] N. Monod, “The neonatal EEG: statistical studies and prognostic value in
full-term and pre-term babies,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 32 no. 5, pp. 529–544, May 1972.
[5] K. Watanabe, “Behavioral state cycles, background EEGs and prognosis
of newborns with perinatal hypoxia,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 49, no. 5–6, pp. 618–625, Sep. 1980.
[6] C. Pezzani, “Neonatal electroencephalography during the first twentyfour hours of life in full-term newborn infants,” Neuropediatrics., vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 11–18, Feb. 1986.
[7] E. Biagioni, “Constantly discontinuous EEG patterns in full-term neonates
with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 110,
no. 9, pp. 1510–1515, Sep. 1999.
[8] C. C. Menache, “Prognostic value of neonatal discontinuous EEG,” Pediatr. Neurol., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 93–101, Aug. 2002.
[9] D. M. Murray, “Early EEG findings in hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
predict outcomes at 2 years,” Pediatrics, vol. 124, no. 3, pp. 459–467,
Aug. 2009.

983

[10] T. N. Tsuchida, “American clinical neurophysiology society standardized
EEG terminology and categorization for the description of continuous
EEG monitoring in neonates: Report of the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society critical care monitoring committee,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 161–173, Apr. 2013.
[11] C. T. Lombroso, “Neonatal polygraphy in full-term and premature infants: A review of normal and abnormal findings,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 105–155, Apr. 1985.
[12] I. Korotchikova, “Quantitative EEG analysis in neonatal hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 8, pp. 1671–
1678, Feb. 2011.
[13] J. Löfhede, “Automatic classification of background EEG activity in
healthy and sick neonates,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 7, no. 1, Feb. 2010.
[14] K. Palmu, “Detection of ‘EEG bursts’ in the early preterm EEG: Visual versus automated detection,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121, no. 7,
pp. 1015–1022, Jul. 2010.
[15] W. Jennekens, “Automatic burst detection for the EEG of the preterm
infant,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1623–1637, Sep. 2011.
[16] T. J. Mitchell, “Automating the analysis of EEG recordings from
prematurely-born infants: A Bayesian approach,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 124, no. 3, pp. 452–461, Sep. 2012.
[17] N. Koolen, “Line length as a robust method to detect high-activity events:
Automated burst detection in premature EEG recordings,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 125, no. 10, pp. 1985–1994, Feb. 2014.
[18] P. J. Cherian, “Validation of a new automated neonatal seizure detection
system: A clinician’s perspective,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 8,
pp. 1490–1499, Aug. 2011.
[19] M. De Vos, “Automated artifact removal as preprocessing refines neonatal
seizure detection,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 8, pp. 2345–2354,
Dec. 2011.
[20] V. Matic, “Holistic approach for automated background EEG assessment
in asphyxiated full-term infants,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 11, no. 6, Dec. 2014.
[21] V. Matic, “Objective differentiation of neonatal EEG background grades
using detrended fluctuation analysis,” Front. Hum. Neurosci., vol. 9,
no. 189, Apr. 2015.
[22] V. Krajca, “Automatic identification of significant graphoelements in multichannel EEG recordings by adaptive segmentation and fuzzy clustering,” Int. J. Biomed. Comput., vol. 28, no. 1–2, pp. 71–89, May–Jun.
1991.
[23] V. Matic, “Automated EEG inter-burst interval detection in neonates with
mild to moderate postasphyxial encephalopathy,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 2012, vol. 2012, pp. 17–20..
[24] J. A. Suykens, “Least squares support vector machine classifiers,” Neural
Process. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 293–300, 1999.
[25] K. De Brabanter, “LS-SVMlab Toolbox User’s Guide,” Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, ESAT-SISTA Tech. Rep. 10-146,
2010.
[26] S. Xavier-de-Souza, “Coupled simulated annealing,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern. B, Cybern., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 320–335, Apr. 2004.
[27] J. Löfhede, “Classification of burst and suppression in the neonatal electroencephalogram,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 402–410, Dec. 2008.
[28] A. Flisberg, “Prognostic capacity of automated quantification of suppression time in the EEG of post asphyctic full term neonates,” Acta Paediatr.,
vol. 100, no. 10, pp. 1338–1343. May 2011.
[29] D. B. Sinclair, “EEG and long-term outcome of term infants with neonatal
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 110, no. 4,
pp. 655–659, Apr. 1999.
[30] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour Of Signal Processing: The Sparse Way. New
York, NY, USA: Academic, 2008.
[31] B. H. Walsh, “The use of conventional EEG for the assessment of hypoxic
ischaemic encephalopathy in the newborn: A review,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 122, no. 7, pp. 1284–1294. May 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

