IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

1025

Multiple Vital-Sign-Based Infection Screening
Outperforms Thermography Independent
of the Classification Algorithm
Yu Yao∗ , Guanghao Sun, Member, IEEE, Takemi Matsui, Yukiya Hakozaki, Stefan van Waasen, and Michael Schiek

Abstract—Goal: Thermography-based infection screening at international airports plays an important role in the prevention of
pandemics. However, studies show that thermography suffers from
low sensitivity and specificity. To achieve higher screening accuracy, we developed a screening system based on the acquisition of
multiple vital-signs. This multimodal approach increases accuracy,
but introduces the need for sophisticated classification methods.
This paper presents a comprehensive analysis of the multimodal
approach to infection screening from a machine learning perspective. Methods: We conduct an empirical study applying six classification algorithms to measurements from the multimodal screening
system and comparing their performance among each other, as well
as to the performance of thermography. In addition, we provide
an information theoretic view on the use of multiple vital-signs for
infection screening. The classification methods are tested using the
same clinical data, which has been analyzed in our previous study
using linear discriminant analysis. A total of 92 subjects were recruited for influenza screening using the system, consisting of 57
inpatients diagnosed to have seasonal influenza and 35 healthy controls. Results: Our study revealed that the multimodal screening
system reduces the misclassification rate by more than 50% compared to thermography. At the same time, none of the multimodal
classifiers needed more than 6 ms for classification, which is negligible for practical purposes. Conclusion: Among the tested classifiers k-nearest neighbors, support vector machine and quadratic
discriminant analysis achieved the highest cross-validated sensitivity score of 93%. Significance: Multimodal infection screening
might be able to address the shortcomings of thermography.
Index Terms—Classification, infection screening, machine learning, supervised learning.

I. INTRODUCTION

I

N recent years, the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome and other highly contagious diseases has highlighted

Manuscript received March 17, 2015; revised August 17, 2015; accepted
September 8, 2015. Date of publication September 17, 2015; date of current
version May 19, 2016. This work was supported by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Asian Human Resources Fund and the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science Research Fellowships for Young Scientists (13J05344).
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ Y. Yao is with the Central Institute, ZEA-2, Electronic Systems, Research
Center Jülich, Jülich D-52425, Germany (e-mail: y.yao@fz-juelich.de).
G. Sun is with the Graduate School of Informatics and Engineering, The
University of Electro-Communications.
T. Matsui is with the Graduate School of System Design, Tokyo Metropolitan
University.
Y. Hakozaki is with the Department of Internal Medicine, Self-Defense Forces
Central Hospital.
S. van Wassen and M. Schick are with ZEA-2, Electronic Systems, Research
Center Jülich.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2479716

the importance of rapid mass screening at international airport quarantines and places of mass gathering, like schools and
hospitals, as a part of strategies for the prevention of pandemics.
Currently, thermography is used for this purpose. However, studies have shown that this approach suffers from low sensitivity
and specificity [1]. In addition, screening based on skin temperature alone can be insufficient for the detection of infected
individuals, since it is affected by many factors, e.g., medication
with antipyretics [2].
To address these problems, a novel multimodal infection
screening system has been developed, which is based on the
contactless acquisition of heart rate, respiration rate and facial temperature [3]–[5]. The inclusion of additional vital-signs
leads to increased screening accuracy [3], but also introduces the
need for more sophisticated classification methods. In contrast
to traditional screening systems based solely on thermography,
classification using simple thresholding is not applicable anymore.
The multimodal screening system has been tested with several classification algorithms in different application scenarios,
including linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [6] and an unsupervised algorithm based on self-organizing maps with k-means
clustering [3]. Classification via support vector machine has
been tested on an improved version of the screening system
designed for use in paediatric wards [7] and logistic regressionbased classification has been tested in a study carried out in a
hospital environment [8]. However, a comprehensive analysis of
the information processing aspect in the context of multimodal
infection screening has yet to be presented. To date, all studies
evaluating the multimodal system have focused on the performance of different classification methods applied to different
datasets and evaluated without cross validation.
While these studies contributed to a better understanding of
the multivital-signs approach to infection screening, an important question remains open: How much performance does the
multimodal system gain compared to the standard method of
thermography?
In this paper, we analyze the multimodal infection screening
system from a machine learning perspective. We compare the
performance of six different classification algorithms on the
task of classifying measurements of the new screening device
into the two classes healthy and potentially infected. Based on
the test results, we discuss the suitability of each algorithm for
application in the multimodal screening device.
For the first time, we also perform a direct comparison between the multimodal screening system and thermography. The

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the multimodal infection screening system. The system acquires heart rate, respiration rate, and facial temperature readings and
feeds them into a classifier, which classifies the measurement as potentially infected or healthy.

results indicate that the multimodal system reduces the misclassification rate by more than 50%. To gain additional insight, we
present an information theoretic view on the problem by comparing the mutual information scores between the class labels
and the different vital-sign readings. This analysis provides a
possible explanation for the difference in performance between
the multimodal screening system and thermography.
It is important to note that the idea behind any mass infection screening approach, including our system, is to screen for
symptoms of a potential infection and not to provide a medical
diagnosis. On the one hand, this means that although our system is tested on patients diagnosed with seasonal influenza, it
will also pick up other diseases which cause similar symptoms,
i.e., elevated heat rate, respiration rate, and body temperature.
On the other hand, the system will not distinguish between different diseases.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we provide an overview on the hardware of the multimodal infection screening system, as well as on the dataset
used. In addition, we provide a short summary of each classification algorithm included in our test. The performance of the
multimodal screening system and the thermography reference
are reported in Section III. Section IV presents an information
theoretic analysis of the multimodal screening system. In Section V, we discuss the results of our analysis, as well as the
limitations of this study. Finally, we close this paper with the
conclusion in Section VI.

II. METHODS AND MATERIAL
A. Data Acquisition
The technical details of the infection screening system are
provided in our previous papers [9], [10]. The system automatically detects infected individuals within 15 s via a classification method using measured multiple vital-signs (see Fig. 1).
Heart and respiration rates are determined using a noncontact
laser Doppler blood-flow meter and a 10 GHz respiration radar,

respectively. The facial temperature is measured via infrared
thermography. As shown in Fig. 1, the heart and respiration
rates and the facial temperature are measured simultaneously,
while the subject holds his/her left palm over the system. The
output signals of the laser Doppler blood-flow meter and the respiration radar are analyzed in real time. The heart and respiration
rates are calculated by fast Fourier transform.
B. Subjects
We tested the classification methods using the same clinical data, which has been analyzed in our previous study using
LDA [6]. A total of 92 subjects were recruited, consisting of
57 inpatients (49 male and 8 female, 19–40 years) diagnosed
to have seasonal influenza using QuickVue Rapid SP Influ kits
(Quidel Corporation, USA). These inpatients were treated with
antiviral medications (i.e., oseltamivir or zanamivir), some of
the inpatients’ body temperature dropped to normal. The 35 normal control subjects (30 male and 5 female, 20–35 years) were
students at the Institute of Medical Radiology Technologists at
the Japan Self-Defense Force Central Hospital. These normal
control subjects had no symptoms of fever, headache, or sore
throat.
The study was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Japan Self-Defense Force Central Hospital.
C. Classification Algorithms
The algorithms considered in this study are: LDA and
quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA), support vector machine
(SVM), k-nearest neighbors (kNN), logistic regression (LR),
and naive Bayes (NB) classifier.
In this section, we provide short introductions for each of
these methods and comment on their strength and weaknesses in
the context of the screening application. For all tested methods,
we used the implementation provided by MATLAB’s statistics
toolbox.
In the following, we denote measurements with xn , which is
a three-dimensional (3-D) vector containing the values for heart

YAO et al.: MULTIPLE VITAL-SIGN-BASED INFECTION SCREENING OUTPERFORMS THERMOGRAPHY

rate, respiration rate, and facial temperature. tn denotes ground
truth class labels, which can take on two values: −1 for healthy
and +1 for infected. The subject index n ranges from 1 to N ,
where N = 92 denotes the number of all subjects.
The symbol N (x|μ, Σ) is used to denote that the random
variable x is distributed according to a multivariate Gaussian
distribution with mean μ and covariance matrix Σ.
1) Discriminant Analysis: LDA is used in the original study
[6], albeit without performing cross validation. Therefore, we
included LDA in this paper and repeat the analysis with cross
validation. In addition, we also investigate if QDA leads to better
performance.
LDA and QDA assume that the class conditional distribution
of the measurements is Gaussian:



(1)
p(xn |tn = i) = N xn |μi ,
i

with i ∈ {−1, 1}. While LDA assumes both covariance matrices to be equal (Σ1 = Σ−1 ), the covariances are allowed to be
different in QDA. Consequently, LDA’s decision boundary is
a hyperplane, while QDA has a quadratic decision boundary
[11]. Mean and covariances are learned from training data with
known labels, e.g., in maximum likelihood learning, the μi and
Σi are simply set to the empirical means and covariances of the
training data of the respective classes [11].
Once μi and Σi have been estimated, classifying a new measurement x is based on the posterior class probability, which
can be obtained via Bayes rule
p(x|t = 1)p(t = 1)
i=−1,1 p(x|t = i)p(t = i)

p(t = 1|x) = 

= 1 − p(t = −1|x).

(2)

Here, p(t = i) denotes the prior probability of class i, which can
either be estimated from the fraction of training data with label
i, or set by hand, if, e.g., the class proportions of the training
data does not reflect the prevalence.
2) Support Vector Machine: The SVM falls into the category
of sparse kernel methods. Sparse means that only a small portion
of the training data contributes to the classification process,
while being a kernel method means that information from the
measurement enters only through a kernel function k(x, x ).
The kernel function is a function that depends on two input
variables and returns a scalar output.
More precisely, a new observation x is classified by evaluating the function
y(x) =

N


an tn k(x, xn ) + b

1027

training sample xn does not contribute to the classification process, giving rise to the sparseness of SVM. A detailed description
of SVM can be found in standard textbooks like [11].
The SVM has two hyperparameters, which have to be fixed
before optimization: the kernel width γ, which determines properties of the kernel function k, and the so-called box constraint
C, which controls the tradeoff between minimizing training errors and limiting model complexity. We choose the values of
the C and γ by minimizing the leave-one-out (LOO) error via
grid search. This approach, however, is susceptible to overfitting
with respect to C and γ and we cannot cite the minimum LOO
error as the test performance of SVM.
Therefore, we evaluate the performance of SVM using a
nested cross-validation scheme: Using N − 1 samples, we calculate the LOO error for each (C, γ)-pair on a 2-D grid and
chose the pair with the lowest LOO error. Then, we train the
SVM with the chosen parameters on all N − 1 samples and test
on the held out sample. This procedure is repeated N times,
each time with a different sample being held out.
3) K-Nearest Neighbors: kNN is considered to be a nonparametric method and despite its simplicity, it often achieves good
performance in practice [11], [13]. One advantage is that kNN
does not require a training phase. Instead, a new measurement x
is assigned the label that holds the majority among the k training data samples which are closest to x. However, this means
that for classification, the entire training set has to be stored and
searched, which can be slow for large and high-dimensional
training sets.
Distance between samples is often measured via Euclidean
distance, but more sophisticated measures like Mahalanobis distances can also be used. In addition, preprocessing steps like,
e.g., neighborhood components analysis (NCA) [14], which
learns a custom Mahalanobis distance from the training data,
can be applied to improve classification results. However, methods like NCA require a training phase.
Similar to SVM, there is a hyperparameter, the number of
neighbors k, which has to be optimized with cross validation. We
use the same kind of nested cross-validation procedure that was
employed in the SVM case to optimize k and avoid overfitting.
4) Logistic Regression: LR is a discriminative approach,
where the logistic sigmoid function σ(a) = (1 + exp(−a))−1
is applied to a linear function of the measurement. The output
is interpreted as posterior class probability
p(t = 1|x) = σ(wT x)
= 1 − p(t = −1|x).

(4)

(3)

n =1

and making a decision based on the sign of y. The variables
an and b are parameters of the SVM, which are learned from
the training data xn by solving a quadratic programming (QP)
problem. The standard algorithm for solving the QP problem
arising in SVM is called sequential minimal optimization [12].
In the typical case, most of the an found after solving the QP
problem are equal to zero. This means that the corresponding

The vector w contains parameters, which can be learned from
the training data using standard optimization methods [11].
The advantage of LR is that the size of w, which corresponds
to the number of parameters of LR, grows linearly with the input dimensionality. In contrast, the number of parameters in the
LDA and QDA methods grows quadratic with the input dimensionality [11]. This leads to increased training and classification
speed for LR.

1028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

TABLE I
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS AND AVERAGE RUNNING TIME
Method

Error rate
[%]

Sensitivity
[%]

Specificity
[%]

Average training time
[ms]

Average classification time
[ms]

Area under curve
[1]

QDA
QDA*
LDA
LDA*
SVM
kNN
LR
NB

9.8
10.9
10.9
13
9.8
10.9
12
14.1

93
89.5
91.2
86
93
93
89.5
89.5

85.7
88.6
85.7
88.6
85.7
82.9
85.7
80

34.9
–
30.7
–
15.4
–
24.5
7.3

3.9
–
3.4
–
0.7
6
1.3
1.4

0.95
–
0.95
–
0.9
0.93
0.95
0.95

thermography
thr1 (32.6 ◦ C)
thr2 (33.1 ◦ C)

25
29.4

87.7
61.4

54.3
85.7

–
–

–
–

0.79
–
–

5) NB Classification: In NB class, conditional distributions
for the inputs are assumed to be independent:
p(x|t) = p(x[1]|t)p(x[2]|t)p(x[3]|t).

(5)

When learning the conditional distributions from data, the 1-D
conditional distributions p(x[j]|t) can be learned for each dimension separately. This greatly simplifies the training process.
Applying Bayes law yields the posterior distribution [11]
p(t = i|x) =

1
p(x[1]|t)p(x[2]|t)p(x[3]|t)p(t = i)
Z

This approach favors the thermography only system, as cross
validation is only performed for the multimodal classification.
Also, it should be noted that for multimodal classifiers, the
decision threshold is only one of several parameters. This means
that for multimodal classifier, especially those with nonlinear
decision surface like SVM or kNN, the ROC accounts for only
one part of the variability of the system.
III. CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE

(6)

where i ∈ {−1, 1}, p(t = i) is the prior class probability and
the unknown constant Z can be obtained via normalization.
Although the independence assumption is rarely satisfied,
NB performs surprisingly well in practice and is often applied
to high-dimensional datasets with many features, where it holds
an advantage due to the simplified training process. However,
since our data has only three dimensions, we do not expect
NB to outperform the other methods. We have included NB in
this study mainly as a reference to compare the other methods
against.
D. Reference Thermography
Since the multivital-signs screening system contains temperature as one of its modalities, it is possible to obtain thermography
data by simply discarding the other modalities.
Thermography-based classification relies on simple thresholding instead of sophisticated classification algorithms. A temperature above the threshold is classified as infected and a
temperature below the threshold is classified as healthy. Thus,
the performance of thermography will depend on the choice of
the temperature threshold.
In order to illustrate the performance of thermography, we calculated the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve [15],
which plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate
for a range of different thresholds. In addition, we calculated
the area under the ROC curve (AUC), which acts as a summary
statistic for the performance of the classifier [16].
As a reference, we also provided the ROC curve for QDA and
kNN classification, as well as AUC values for all classification
methods tested with the multimodal infection screening system.

Table I provides an overview of the classification results.
The upper half of the table presents the performance measures of the multimodal classifiers, which were obtained using LOO cross validation or, in the case of SVM and kNN,
nested cross validation. The results marked with LDA* and
QDA* were obtained by choosing uniform prior class probabilities: p(t = 1) = p(t = −1) = 0.5, instead of learning the prior
from the training data. This is done to test the robustness against
misspecification of prior probabilities.
Average training time denotes the time needed on average
to train the classifiers on N − 1 = 91 samples during the LOO
scheme. Average classification time denotes the time needed on
average to classify the one held out sample. Computation was
performed on a 3 GHz Intel Xeon workstation. Note that there
is no average training time for kNN, since kNN does not require
a training phase.
The average time needed for hyperparameter optimization
was 32.5 s for kNN and 113 s for SVM. However, these times
strongly depend on the size of the grid searched during optimization and are not meaningful by themselves.
The lower half of Table I, consisting of the last three lines, reports the performance of the thermography reference for two exemplary temperature thresholds. thr1 was selected such that the
thermography-based classification would achieve a sensitivity
comparable to that of the multimodal classifiers. However, this
will lead to a significantly lower specificity for thermographybased classification. On the other hand, thr2 was selected such
that the specificity score of the thermography-based classification would match that of the multimodal classifiers. Now, we
observe that the sensitivity of the thermography-based classification drops below the level of the multimodal classifiers. Note
that the temperature thresholds in Table I seem very low because

YAO et al.: MULTIPLE VITAL-SIGN-BASED INFECTION SCREENING OUTPERFORMS THERMOGRAPHY

1029

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF BIMODAL CLASSIFICATION
QDA
Error rate [%]
Sensitivity [%]
Specificity [%]

HR + RR

HR + FT

RR + FT

9.8
93
85.7

10.9
91.2
85.7

22.8
79
74.3

and the results are summarized in Table III. The increase in error rate provides an indicator for the importance of the left out
modality.
IV. INFORMATION THEORETIC ANALYSIS
A. Mutual Information
Fig. 2. ROC plots for the thermography only classification, as well as QDA
and kNN. The two exemplary facial temperature thresholds listed in Table I are
indicated by thr1 and thr2 .
TABLE II
MEAN VALUE OF SELECTED PARAMETERS OF THE MULTIMODAL CLASSIFIERS
QDA
μ H, c = 66.2
σ HH, c = 9.8
μ H, i = 90.2
σ HH, i = 11.5
NB
μ H, c
σ H, c
μ H, i
σ H, i

= 66.2
= 9.8
= 90.2
= 11.5

LDA

SVM

μ H, c = 66.2
σ HH = 10.9
μ H, i = 90.2

C = 0.064
γ = 5.78

kNN

LR

k = 4.5

w 0 = 53.15
w 1 = −0.22
w 2 = −0.5
w 3 = −0.86

our device is measuring the facial temperature, which is a few
degrees lower than the body core temperature [9].
The last column in Table I reports AUC values for all classification methods, where the AUC values for the multimodal
classifiers were obtained with LOO cross validation.
In addition, Fig. 2 shows the ROC curves for the thermography only classification, as well as QDA and kNN. QDA and kNN
were selected as representatives, since plotting ROC curves for
all multimodal classifiers would have cluttered the image. Additionally, Fig. 2 also shows the position of thr1 and thr2 within
the thermography ROC curve. The lowest error rate achieved by
thermography, using any of the thresholds, is 25%.
Since the performance estimates for the multimodal classifiers were obtained using cross validation, there is no unique set
of parameters. Instead, we report the mean values for selected
parameters for each of the classifiers in Table II. Note, however,
that this serves only to provide the reader with a rough idea
about the range of the parameters.
In order to supplement the information theoretic analysis
presented in Section IV, we have conducted an additional experiment to assess the relative importance of the modalities.
We selected one vital-sign, which was then removed from the
data. The remaining bimodal input vectors were classified using
QDA. This procedure was repeated for each of the vital-sings

In information theory, the concept of entropy is used to measure the information content of a random variable [17]. For a
(discrete) random variable x with distribution p(x), it is defined
as

p(x) log p(x)
(7)
H(x) = −


x

where x denotes summation over all possible values of x.
Closely related is the concept of mutual information, which
measures the information content that one random variable x
conveys about another random variable y and vice versa. If
p(x, y) is the joint distribution of the two variables and p(x) and
p(y) denote the marginal distribution of x and y, respectively,
the mutual information can be expressed as

p(x)p(y)
.
(8)
p(x, y) log
I(x, y) = −
p(x, y)
x
y


Furthermore, we have 0 ≤ I(x, y) ≤ min H(x), H(y) , with
I(x, y) = 0 if and only if x and y are independent [11], [17].
The unit of entropy and mutual information is “bit” when
calculated using the logarithm to the base of two and “nat”
when calculated using the natural logarithm. Both units differ
by a factor of ln 2 .
When performing a classification task, one would like to
use inputs which convey as much information about the class
labels as possible. Therefore, we used the data from our study
to estimate the mutual information between class labels and the
vital-signs acquired by the screening system.
The entropy of the class label estimated from our dataset is
0.96 bit, which is an upper bound on the mutual information.
The entropy is lower than 1 because the number of patients and
controls are not exactly balanced.
The marginal and joint probability distributions used to calculate the mutual information score are estimated via histograms,
where the numerical values of each modality are quantized into
a certain number of steps, also called bins. This method has the
advantage of being simple and independent of any assumptions
about the parametric form of the data’s distribution [11].
On the other hand, the number of bins will affect the estimated distribution and, thus, also the mutual information score.
The problem is that a very small number of bins will yield

1030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

TABLE IV
MUTUAL INFORMATION BETWEEN CLASS LABELS AND VITAL-SIGNS
# bins

24
32
40
8 (2 3 )
27 (3 3 )
64 (4 3 )

heart rate
[bit]

resp. rate
[bit]

facial temp.
[bit]

all modalities
[bit]

0.58
0.63
0.67
0.3
0.47
0.44

0.34
0.32
0.36
0.11
0.13
0.14

0.39
0.44
0.45
0.09
0.14
0.19

–
–
–
0.45
0.61
0.7

histograms which are too coarse to reflect the details of the distribution; while for very large number of bins, the number of
samples is not enough to fill the bins, leading to noisy estimates
of the distribution [11]. When using histograms, the aim should
be to choose the number of quantization steps from an intermediate range [11], i.e., high enough to retain the details of the
underlying distribution, but not much higher than the number of
samples.
Taking the aforementioned points into account, we have calculated the mutual information score for several different numbers of bins chosen from an intermediate range. This allows us
to check whether the conclusions drawn in Section V depend on
the quantization.
Table IV contains two sets of mutual information estimates.
In the first three rows, we report the mutual information between
the class labels and each of the modalities, for three different
numbers of bins. The lower half of Table IV contains estimates of
the mutual information between the class label and the complete
input vector containing all three modalities.
For the latter estimates, the input space has been quantized
into a n×n×n grid, where n = 2, 3, 4. As a reference, we have
also provided the mutual information between the labels and
the single modality using the n-step quantization. However, it
should be noted that both the 8-bin and 64-bin quantization are
not well suited for our dataset, since 8 bins corresponds to a
very coarse binary quantization of each input dimension and 64
bins exceeds the number of both controls (35) and patients (57)
in our dataset.
B. Mutual Information Versus Statistical Testing
As an alternative to the mutual information score, one could
use statistical testing to assess if the vital-signs distribution of
the patient group differs significantly from that of the healthy
controls. For example, Welch’s t-test can be used to test if the
mean heart rate of patients is significantly higher than the mean
heart rate of the control subjects, assuming both distributions
are Gaussian. The output of a t-test is a so called p-value. If the
p-value is smaller than a preselected threshold (typically 0.05),
then the null hypothesis that the mean of both groups are equal
can be rejected [18].
The t-test is a well-established method for testing for statistical significance. However, in our case, the aim is to assess
which of the vital-signs is most suited for the classification task
at hand. A low p-value signifies strong statistical evidence that

the mean vital-signs readings of both groups are unequal, but
it does not tell us directly how big the difference is, or if one
modality is better suited for classification than the other.
For this reason, we prefer to compare the modalities on the
basis of the mutual information scores, which offer a more
intuitive interpretation and a direct answer to our question.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Multimodal Screening Versus Thermography
The results in Table I show that classification based solely on
thermography suffers more heavily from the tradeoff between
sensitivity and specificity than any of the multimodal classifiers.
When adjusting the threshold to match the sensitivity scores
of the multimodal classifiers (thr1 ), the specificity score drops
below the level of the multimodal classifiers. Conversely, when
adjusting the threshold to match specificity scores (thr2 ), the
sensitivity score drops.
The lowest error rate for thermography achieved with any
threshold is 25%. However, unlike in the cases of the multimodal
classifiers, the error rates reported for thermography are not
cross validated. All multimodal classifiers, with the exception
of NB, achieve cross-validated error rates, which are more than
50% lower than the minimum error rate of thermography. This
shows that acquiring additional vital-signs beside temperature
can significantly improve screening performance.
Training of the classifiers can be performed in advance and
the time required for the classification process itself is negligible. Therefore, the only disadvantage of the multimodal approach lies in the increased cost and complexity of the hardware,
compared to thermography only systems. However, with the decreasing cost of electronic components, this aspect will become
less and less relevant. Also, the cost of the screening system
itself has to be weighed against the cost saved due to the increased level of accuracy (e.g., less follow up examinations by
quarantine personnel, less undetected infections, etc.).
B. Comparing the Classification Algorithms
Based on the classification speed, SVM is the fastest algorithm, due to being a sparse method, i.e., using only part of the
training data. It also achieved the best performance. However, it
has two free hyperparameters, which require a computationally
expensive optimization procedure. More problematic than the
complexity of hyperparameter optimization, which can be done
offline, is the potential for overfitting associated with optimization. Thus, SVM is an appealing method, which requires careful
training to avoid overfitting [11].
QDA achieved good test results, but its performance depends
on the prior probability, which is difficult to estimate. In reality,
prior probabilities will be application dependent, e.g., at airport
quarantines or in schools, the number of infected individuals is
low and a reasonable choice for the prior would be the prevalence
rate of infectious diseases in the general public. However, if the
scanner is used in a hospital, a uniform prior might be more
suitable.

YAO et al.: MULTIPLE VITAL-SIGN-BASED INFECTION SCREENING OUTPERFORMS THERMOGRAPHY

Although LDA performed only slightly worse than QDA, the
results show that LDA’s performance is more sensitive to the
choice of prior probabilities. Considering the increased accuracy
of QDA and the fact that QDA is only slightly slower than LDA,
QDA should be favored over LDA.
kNN performed surprisingly well, despite its simplicity. In
fact, kNN achieved a sensitivity score, which is equal to the
sensitivity of SVM and QDA. Applying more sophisticated preprocessing might further improve the performance. However,
it is the slowest classifier, which could be problematic when
making the transition to embedded hardware, combined with a
much larger training dataset.
Since training and hyperparameter optimization can be performed in advance on workstations, the most important time to
consider is the average classification time. Although, in practice,
the classifier will be running on a slow embedded system, the
classification times in our experiments were several magnitudes
below the time needed for data acquisition, which is in the range
of 10 s [9], [10]. Thus, the classification time can be considered
as negligible for practical purposes. The only exception to this
could be kNN because kNN’s classification time grows linearly
with the size of the training set, which might be significant larger
in the actual application than in our study.
With three modalities per observation, the dimension of our
dataset is low for typical machine learning applications. This
also explains why simpler methods like NB and LR have no
decisive advantage in speed over more complex methods like,
e.g., LDA, which outperform them.
C. Mutual Information and Bimodal Classification
The result in Table IV indicates that the exact value of the
mutual information depends on the number of bins. Nevertheless, we can observe a clear ordering of the modalities. Although
body temperature is generally considered to be a good predictor
of fever, the values in Table IV show that, for our dataset, the
by far most informative single modality is heart rate, independent of the number of quantization steps. Facial temperature is
only the second most informative modality, closely followed by
respiration rate.
Comparing the values in the second half of Table IV reveal that the mutual information between label and temperature
is smaller than the average mutual information per dimension
when using all three modalities (e.g., 0.14 bit versus 0.2 bit
for 27 bins). This observation also holds for all quantizations,
and it explains the significant advantage in performance of the
multivital-signs system compared to thermography.
A possible reason for this observation could be the fact that
the patients in our study received treatment with antiviral medication. Thus, the use of fever reducing medication may lead to a
reduction of the discriminative power of thermography. This is
a scenario one might also encounter in mass screening applications and it has already been recognized as a potential shortcoming of thermography-based infection screening [2]. Multimodal
screening might be a way to address this problem.
These findings are also supported by the results of the bimodal
classification experiment given in Table III, which show that

1031

the exclusion of heart rate doubles the error rate. On the other
hand, the exclusion of respiration rate or facial temperature did
not affect the classification performance very much. Especially,
the information conveyed by the respiration rate seems to be
redundant.
A possible explanation is the difficulty of measuring respiration rate when the observation periods are very short. Given that
the observation period is 15 s long [9], [10], it will most likely
only contain two or three respiration cycles. Thus, respiration
rate might be the noisiest modality among the three vital-sings
acquired by the system.
D. Limitations of the Current Study
Our dataset contains a total of 92 subjects, which can be considered big for a medical study. However, it is small compared
to typical datasets from the field of machine learning. This is a
limiting factor to the accuracy of our tests.
In addition, the group of control subjects mainly consist of
students, i.e., young male individuals. This introduces a certain bias to the measurements from the control group and also
limits the variability of the dataset. A more realistic and, thus,
more heterogeneous dataset would include patients suffering
from noninfectious diseases in the control group, e.g., heart or
respiratory diseases which could affect heart rate or respiratory
rate.
The shortcomings of the current dataset mean that the absolute
values of the performance measures reported here might be too
optimistic. However, the main focus of this paper is the comparison of the performance of multimodal screening relative to
thermography, as well as the comparison among the different
classification algorithms which can be used with the multimodal
system. In this context, the limitations of the dataset applies to
all methods. In addition, our cross-validation scheme favors the
results for thermography.
In order to address these limitations, we are planning to extend
the current study to include a larger and more realistic dataset.
We will try to recruit volunteers suffering from noninfectious
diseases which affect heart or respiration rate, in order to test the
robustness of the multimodal screening system. In addition, we
are planning further tests of the multimodal system in different
clinical settings.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we compared a multimodal infection screening
system to screening via thermography, which is the current standard. We also compared different classification algorithms for
use with the multimodal system. To our best knowledge, this is
the first time when such an extensive comparison based on one
common dataset has been presented. In addition, an information
theoretic analysis has been carried out, which explained some
of the observed results.
In this study, acquiring heart and respiration rate in addition to
facial temperature allowed us to reduce the misclassification rate
by more than 50%. In addition, the mutual information scores
and the bimodal classification results indicate that the multiple vital-signs approach to infection screening could present a

1032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

solution to the problem of identifying infected individuals who
received treatment with antipyretics.
The comparison between the classification algorithms revealed that SVM and QDA are the two most promising classification methods for a multimodal screening device for infection
screening. kNN can be considered as an alternative. Future studies with larger and more realistic subject population should focus
on these three methods.

Yu Yao received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree in physics
from the University of Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany, in 2015.
He is currently a Member of the team “Modeling
and Algorithmics” at the Central Institute of Engineering, Electronics and Analytics–Electronic Systems, Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany. His
research interests include methods from the field of
nonlinear dynamics and their application to biosignal
processing.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Bitar et al., “International travels and fever screening during epidemics:
A literature review on the effectiveness and potential use of non-contact
infrared thermometers,” Eurosurveillance, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1–5, 2009.
[2] H. Nishiura and K. Kamiya, “Fever screening during the influenza (H1N12009) pandemic at Narita international airport, Japan,” BMC Infectious
Dis., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 111–121, 2011.
[3] G. Sun et al., “A novel non-contact infection screening system based on
self-organizing map with k-means clustering,” Commun. Comput. Inform.
Sci., vol. 258, pp. 125–132, 2011.
[4] G. Sun et al., “Development of an infection screening system for entry
inspection at airport quarantine stations using ear temperature, heart and
respiration rates,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Ann. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2013, pp. 6716–6719.
[5] G. Sun et al., “Development of a stand-alone physiological monitoring
system for noncontact heart and respiration rate measurements on realtime linux platform,” in The 15th International Conference on Biomedical
Engineering, J. Goh, Ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, vol. 43,
pp. 649–651.
[6] T. Matsui et al., “A novel screening method for influenza patients using
a newly developed non-contact screening system,” J. Infection, vol. 60,
no. 4, pp. 271–277, 2010.
[7] G. Sun et al., “A pediatric infection screening system with a radar respiration monitor for rapid detection of seasonal influenza among outpatient
children,” J. Infectious Dis. Therapy, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 1–4, 2014.
[8] V. Q. Nguyen et al., “Rapid screening for influenza using a multivariable
logistic regression model to save labor at a clinic in Iwaki, Fukushima,
Japan,” Amer. J. Infection Control, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 551–553, 2014.
[9] T. Matsui et al., “The development of a non-contact screening system
for rapid medical inspection at a quarantine depot using a laser doppler
blood-flow meter, microwave radar and infrared thermography,” J. Med.
Eng. Technol., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 481–487, 2009.
[10] G. Sun et al., “A portable screening system for onboard entry screening
at international airports using a microwave radar, reflective photo sensor
and thermography,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Instrum., Commun. Inform.
Technol. Biomed. Eng., 2011, pp. 107–110.
[11] C. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (ser. Information
Science and Statistics). Cambridge, MA, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[12] J. C. Platt, “Fast training of support vector machines using sequential
minimal optimization,” in Advances in Kernel Methods, B. Schölkopf,
C. J. C. Burges, and A. J. Smola, Eds. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press,
1999, pp. 185–208.
[13] N. Altman, “An introduction to kernel and nearest-neighbor nonparametric
regression,” Amer. Statist., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 175–185, 1992.
[14] J. Goldberger et al., “Neighbourhood components analysis,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 17. Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, 2004, pp. 513–520.
[15] M. H. Zweig and G. Campbell, “Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)
plots: A fundamental evaluation tool in clinical medicine,” Clin. Chem.,
vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 561–577, 1993.
[16] A. P. Bradley, “The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning algorithms,” Pattern Recog., vol. 30, no. 7,
pp. 1145–1159, 1997.
[17] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[18] G. Privitera, Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA,
USA: SAGE, 2011.

Guanghao Sun (S’12-M’15) received the B.S. degree in medical engineering from Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan, in 2011. He completed the Frontier Science Course supported by the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan,
in 2011. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
system design engineering from Tokyo Metropolitan
University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2013 and 2015, respectively.
From April 2013 to September 2015, he was a
Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. In October 2015, he joined The University of ElectroCommunications, Tokyo, as an Assistant Professor. His research interests include noncontact biomeasurement, medical device design, biomedical signal
processing, and data mining.
Dr. Sun received the 2013 BES-SEC Design Silver Award for designing
a multiple vital-signs-based infection screening system, and the 2014 Chinese
Government Award for Outstanding Self-financed Student Abroad.

Takemi Matsui received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in physics from the University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan, in 1984 and 1986, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in medicine from Saitama Medical
School, Saitama, Japan, in 1995.
He proposed a variety of screening systems, including vital-signs-based noncontact infection screening system, and depression screening system by autonomic nerves monitoring. He joined the
National Defense Medical College as a Faculty Member in 1997, and has been a Professor of medical engineering at Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan, since 2005.

Yukiya Hakozaki received the Graduate degree from
National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa,
Japan, in 1981, and the Ph.D. degree in medicine
from Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 1986.
He was with Self-Defense Forces Central hospital for a long period of time. Since November 2014,
he has been working as the Yokohama Director of
a hospital. His subspecialty is gastroenterology in
internal medicine, and he holds many medical specialists and advising doctors (for example, Society
of Gastroenterology, Gastroenterological endoscopy,
and ultrasonography). The latest research has announced the article of the relation of colorectal cancer and a lifestyle-related disease and special disaster and
civil protection law in Japan.

YAO et al.: MULTIPLE VITAL-SIGN-BASED INFECTION SCREENING OUTPERFORMS THERMOGRAPHY

Stefan van Waasen received the Diploma and Doctors degrees in electrical engineering from GerhardMercator-University, Duisburg, Germany, in 1994
and 1999, respectively.
The topic of his doctoral thesis was optical receivers up to 60 Gb/s based on traveling wave
amplifiers. In 1998, he joined Siemens Semiconductors/Infineon Technologies AG, Düsseldorf, Germany. His responsibility was BiCMOS and CMOS
RF system development for highly integrated cordless systems like DECT and Bluetooth. In 2001, he
changed into the IC development of front-end systems for high data rate optical
communication systems. From 2004 to 2006, he was with the Stockholm Design
Center responsible for the short-range analog, mixed-signal, and RF development for SoC CMOS solutions. In the period 2006 to 2010, he was responsible
for the wireless RF system engineering in the area of SoC CMOS products
at the headquarter in Munich, Germany, and later in the Design Center Duisburg, Duisburg. Since 2010, he has been the Director of the Central Institute of
Engineering, Electronics and Analytics–Electronic Systems at Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany. In addition to the institute expertise for
electronic system development for the research area, he is building up a new
development team on SoC CMOS solutions for the experiment area.

1033

Michael Schiek received the Diploma degree in
physics and the Ph.D. degree, both from the Technical Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische Hochschule,
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, in 1994 and
1998, respectively.
Since 1998, he has been a Scientific Assistant at
the Research Center Jülich, Central Institute of Engineering, Electronics and Analytics–Electronic Systems, Jülich, Germany, where he is heading the team
“Modeling and Algorythmics.” His current research
interests include nonlinear time series analysis, modeling, and distributed sensor-actuator networks.

