IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

933

Step Detection and Parameterization for
Gait Assessment Using a Single
Waist-Worn Accelerometer
Cristina Soaz∗ and Klaus Diepold

Abstract—One of the major reasons why the elderly lose their
ability to live independently at home is the decline in gait performance. A measure to assess gait performance using accelerometers
is step counting. The main problem with most step detection algorithms is the loss of accuracy at low speeds (<0.8 m/s) which limits
their use in frail elderly populations. In this paper, a step detection
algorithm was developed and validated using data from 10 healthy
adults and 21 institutionalized seniors, predominantly frail older
adults. Data were recorded using a single waist-worn triaxial accelerometer as each of the subjects performed one 10-m-walk trial.
The algorithm demonstrated high mean sensitivity (99 ± 1%) for
gait speeds between 0.2–1.5 m/s. False positives were evaluated
with a series of motion activities performed by one subject. These
activities simulate acceleration patterns similar to those generated
near the body’s center of mass while walking in terms of amplitude signal and periodicity. Cycling was the activity which led to a
higher number of false positives. By applying template matching,
we reduced by 73% the number of false positives in the cycling
activity and eliminated all false positives in the rest of activities.
Using K-means clustering, we obtained two different characteristic
step patterns, one for normal and one for frail walking, where particular gait events related to limb impacts and muscle flexions were
recognized. The proposed system can help to identify seniors at
high risk of functional decline and monitor the progress of patients
undergoing exercise therapy interventions.
Index Terms—Body’s center of mass, elderly people, gait analysis, step detection, triaxial accelerometer.

I. INTRODUCTION
YPICALLY the elderly lose their ability to live independently because of decline in functional mobility, frailty,
or dementia; and many require long-term care, which can include hospitalization, community care, and home nursing [1].
Consequences of age-associated functional decline represent a
substantial socioeconomic hurdle for the community, especially
in developed countries where the number of dependent older
people is forecast to quadruple by 2050 [1].
Home-based programs targeting underlying impairments in
functional mobility can reduce the progression of functional
decline among the elderly [2]. A primary factor in evaluating
functional mobility is the assessment of gait performance [3].

T

Manuscript received May 20, 2015; revised August 28, 2015; accepted
September 8, 2015. Date of publication September 18, 2015; date of current
version May 19, 2016. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
* C. Soaz is with the Institute of Data Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technical University of Munich,
Munich 80331, Germany (e-mail: cristina.soaz@tum.de).
K. Diepold is with the Institute of Data Processing, Department of Electrical
Engineering and Information Technology, Technical University of Munich.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2480296

Main outcome measures of such an assessment include number
of steps [4] and parameters derived from step detection, like
cadence or step duration [5].
Among the existing technologies for gait analysis, triaxial
accelerometers have been presented as a portable and reliable
alternative [6]–[11]. They can be used in clinical settings and to
record long-term acceleration data in free-living environments
for higher ecological validity. Accelerometers are also useful
to monitor patients in rehabilitation therapy [12] and as fall
detectors [13]–[15].
However, the performance of accelerometry-based algorithms for step detection at low walking speeds is still deficient.
This is a great limitation since the populations who could benefit
most from step detection applications for medical diagnosis and
monitoring of ambulatory ability are the frail elderly or patients
with gait impairment walking at low speeds. In particular, in
elderly persons with frailty syndrome usual gait speeds are ≤
0.75–0.8 m/s [16], [17].
The only studies that used accelerometers for step detection
and reported good results at low gait speeds (as low as 0.1 m/s),
used multiple sensors or placed the sensor on the ankle [18]–
[20]. Using multiple acceleration sensors allows the complex
activity detection, but it is highly likely that this will increase
costs and will reduce wearer compliance. Placing accelerometers in multiple locations can become cumbersome for the
wearer, especially in long-term monitoring applications [21],
[22]. With a single sensor, most studies adopt waist placement
because of the limited obtrusiveness of the sensor and because
the waist is close to the center of mass (CoM) of the human
body, and so the accelerations measured at this location can
better represent the major human motion [23]. Among studies
using single waist-worn accelerometers [24]–[33], the results of
the detection in frail elderly populations or for low gait speeds
(<0.8 m/s) was considerably poor (minimum relative error =
19.1%) [32], [33]. Only one study [34] using data from older
adults reported acceptable results for slow paces, with a mean
absolute percentage error equal to 4.3 ± 1.1%. However, the
seniors who participated in this study were relatively young
and authors did not provide numeric values for the walking
speed.
In general, weaknesses found in previous studies comprise
the following.
A. Inadequate Database
Dijkstra [34], Marschollek [33], and Storti [32] included in
their studies a reasonable minimum amount of data from elderly

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

persons. The remaining authors, either only included a few
young subjects in their studies [26], [27], [29]–[31] or a low
number of gait-impaired patients [24], [25], [31].
B. Lack of Information About Detection Accuracy
Zijlstra [27] was the only author who reported detailed information about the accuracy of the algorithm relative to different
walking speeds but he restricted his study to healthy subjects.
Although Marschollek et al. did not report information about
walking speed, they showed results of the relative errors in the
number of steps detected in elderly persons. The errors ranged
from 28.1% to 62.1%, depending on the algorithm they used.
The more customized the algorithms were to specific walking
patterns, the worse they performed on different samples.
C. Inadequate Validation Method
With the exception of Dijkstra [34] and González [30], all
authors used the same database as training and validation set,
which may lead to an overestimation of algorithm accuracy,
especially with small databases.
D. Inability of Recognizing Specific Gait Events
Only three authors [27], [28], [30] developed algorithms to
recognize each heel strike and validated it by comparison with a
reference value, in contrast to other authors who simply detected
a series of maxima or minima in the acceleration signal without
verifying to which gait event these peaks corresponded to.
The aim of this research is, by using a single waist-worn
R
accelerometer—the actibelt
, to improve the step detection in
elderly subjects walking at low speeds, and therefore, at risk of
functional decline. A further aim is to investigate the potential of
such a device to assess gait ability in seniors based on differences
between healthy and frail walking patterns.
II. GAIT ANALYSIS PRINCIPLES
Walking is a complex task involving nervous, somatosensory,
and musculoskeletal systems. The contribution of each body
segment is determined by gait speed. Normal walking speed
primarily involves the lower extremities, with the arms and trunk
providing stability and balance [35].
The gait cycle is comprised of a complete stride, or equivalently a sequence of two steps. A step is defined as the interval
between two consecutive heel strikes and is the elementary periodic signal measurable with the accelerometer near the CoM
during walking. A step is characterized by the following phases
and events (see Fig. 1).
A. Initial Contact (IC) or Heel Strike
The IC occurs in the first 0–2% period of the gait cycle when
the foot first contacts the ground [36]. At this instant, the vertical
component of the ground reaction force, the main contributor of
the forces acting on the CoM, reaches a maximum of 120–150%
of the body weight (BW) [37], [38]. During running, these forces
can reach up to 500% of BW [39]. The position of the ankle joint

R
Fig. 1. Important phases for the detection of steps using the actibelt
sensor.
Image adapted from [43].

at this instant determines the force response, and therefore, the
R
acceleration signal.
way this IC is manifested in the actibelt
B. Loading Response
The loading response is a bipedal phase which occupies about
10% of the gait cycle [40], from the IC to toe off of the opposite
leg. During the loading response, the foot comes into full contact
with the floor; the knee flexes slightly, absorbing some power
in order to reduce the IC on the floor; and the BW is transferred
onto the stance limb [40]. A smooth transfer guarantees the
stability of the upper body [41]. It is in the loading response
phase that a running step can be distinguished from a walking
step. If there is no bipedal stance, the person no longer walks but
R
acceleration signal during running,
runs [42]. In the actibelt
the acceleration in the vertical direction crosses the 0 g line
(g: the gravitational acceleration, 9.81 m/s2 ) twice: once when
the body accelerates upwards along the positive direction of the
vertical axis propelled by the calf muscle; and again when it
descends in free fall for a very short time, right before reaching
the ground.
C. Single Limb Support
During this phase (10–50%), the body is supported by one
single leg and the forces drop on average to about 60–80% of
the BW. [36]. The body begins to move from force absorption of
impact—mid stance (10–30%)—to force propulsion forward—
terminal stance (30–50%) [35].
III. METHODS
A. Subjects
In total, 31 subjects were recruited for this study, out of which
10 were adults with a mean age of 37.3 ± 18.5 years (range 22 to
64 years) and 21 were institutionalized seniors with a mean age
of 82.2 ± 6.3 years (range 67 to 90 years). Adults were recruited
among relatives and university students, and seniors were recruited at nursing homes. The local ethics committee approved
the study and all subjects signed the informed consent prior
to participation. Acceleration and video data were collected
as each of the subjects performed one 10-m-walk trial. Furthermore, one female (30 years old) was filmed while wearing

SOAZ AND DIEPOLD: STEP DETECTION AND PARAMETERIZATION FOR GAIT ASSESSMENT USING A SINGLE WAIST-WORN

935

and subsequently matching the peak acceleration value in the
anteroposterior acceleration signal with the frame that displays
the instant of the impact.
C. Data Collection Protocol

R
Fig. 2. Images of (a) actibelt
sensor and (b) axis directions. Image (b)
adapted from [45].

the sensor and as she performed a series of motion activities with
a similar acceleration pattern to that originated while walking.
Subjects were classified as frail walkers if their walking speed,
measured over 10 m, was under 0.75 m/s. We chose a speed
equal to 0.75 m/s as decision threshold for frailty based on
the cutoff point suggested in the scale developed by Fried et al.
[16]. According to this criterion, all seniors, except a 67 year-old
senior with mean walking speed higher than 0.75 m/s, and one
adult with mean walking speed equal to 0.66 m/s, were classified
as frail walkers. We further categorized frail walkers as mildly
frail (not needing a walking aid and able to complete daily
tasks independently), moderately frail (needing a walking aid
and dependent on specific services to complete daily tasks), and
severely frail (needing a walking aid; incapable of transferring
themselves and completing daily tasks).
B. Equipment
1) Acceleration Sensor: Data was collected using the
R
R
[44] sensor shown in Fig. 2(a). The actibelt
is a triactibelt
axial accelerometer (ADXL 345 BCCZ Analog Devices) placed
inside a belt buckle that can be worn on a normal belt or on an
elastic belt strapped around the waist. The design is unobtrusive
and ensures that the accelerometer is located close to the subR
sensor are: 67 × 10
ject’s CoM. The dimensions of the actibelt
3
× 40 mm (L × W × H); the weight is 34 gm. The acceleration
sensor measures up to ±6 g (g = 9.81 m/s/s) with a resolution
of 0.0024 g and sample frequency fs = 100 Hz.
The power supply is provided by a rechargeable LiPo battery that lasts approximately one month and can be recharged
via USB in 2 h. The data is stored in an internal flash memory
with a capacity of 512 MB, allowing uninterrupted recording
for about ten days. The acceleration signal recorded by the
accelerometer is comprised of static gravity and dynamic acceleration components relative to the trunk along the vertical,
mediolateral, and anteroposterior directions. In anatomical position [see Fig. 2(b)], the orientation of the accelerometer is
the following: positive X values correspond to up acceleration,
positive Y values correspond to left acceleration, and positive
Z values correspond to anterior acceleration.
2) High-Speed Video Camera: A high-speed camera (Go
Pro HERO3), configured to record at 100 Hz with the highest
resolution (1280 × 960 pixels), was used as the gold standard
for acceleration data annotation. Synchronization of camera and
accelerometer was accomplished by filming a tap on the sensor

1) 10-m-walk data: Standardized 10-m-walk tests were performed by the healthy adults and seniors described in the previous section. At the beginning of each test, an experimenter
verified that the accelerometer was oriented correctly, firmly
fastened around the waist, and centered at the middle of the
mediolateral axis. The test consisted of walking a minimum
distance of 10 m at self-selected normal speed along a straight
path. Participants started to walk approximately 1 m before the
start line and stopped around 1 m after the end line to minimize the effect of acceleration and deceleration. Additional
lines were marked on the floor to track the speed, with a maximum separation of 3 m between lines. The experimenter walked
slightly behind the test subjects in order to influence their walking speed as little as possible, holding the high-speed camera
attached to a metal rod at ground level to record the contacts of
the foot with the ground. The camera lens was perpendicularly
aligned to the anteroposterior plane. Participants were allowed
to use a walking frame or crutches, or grasp somebody’s arm
for support. Each participant completed one walking trial. The
data collection process was done at two different points in time,
approximately three weeks apart from each other.
2) Walking-Like Data: In order to test for false positives,
repetitions of nine different movements were recorded: 1–2)
moving the heel up-and-down while sitting and also while standing, 3–5) doing sit-ups, push-ups, and a standing toe-touch, 6–8)
shaking the sensor up-down, backward-forward, and left-right,
and 9) cycling. All of them were performed by the same subject, a 30 year-old female, and repeated continuously with a
frequency comprised between 1.5 and 2.6 Hz—the limits of the
average human step frequency [46]. We call these movements
walking-like movements because their acceleration pattern is
similar to the pattern generated while walking in terms of signal amplitude and periodicity (tested by visual inspection of
the raw data). The duration of each walking-like record was
approximately 15 s, except for cycling when it was 30 s.
D. Datasets
Two analysis were performed using the 10-m-walk data. The
first analysis consists of an exploratory analysis which was performed to gain understanding on how the gait acceleration pattern changes according to the subject’s walking ability and,
thereby, determine an optimal methodology for robust step detection. For the exploratory analysis, we used the data procured
at the first time point of the data collection. The second analysis
comprises the algorithm development and step parameterization, and makes use of the entire data set (the exploratory data
and the data collected at the second time point) divided in training and validation part. Subjects included in each analysis are
detailed below.
1) Data Subset for Exploratory Analysis: This subset consists of a group of five healthy adults (four females, one male)

936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

TABLE I
GENDER OF PARTICIPANTS (f STANDS FOR FEMALE AND m FOR MALE), MEAN
(SD) AGE, AND MEAN (SD) WALKING SPEED

Training

Adults
Seniors

Validation

Adults
Seniors

nonfrail
nonfrail
mild
moderate
severe
nonfrail
mild
mild
moderate
severe

Gender
f:m

Mean Age
± SD (yrs)

Mean Speed
± SD (m/s)

3:2
0:1
4:1
2:0
2:0
2:2
1:0
4:0
4:0
3:1

35.2 ± 17.6
67
83.0 ± 5.9
80.3 ± 4.2
86.0 ± 2.8
33.8 ± 19.7
62
82.0 ± 6.7
79.5 ± 6.6
87.0 ± 2.0

1.30 ± 0.19
0.96
0.63 ± 0.21
0.41 ± 0.04
0.42 ± 0.23
1.23 ± 0.33
0.66
0.50 ± 0.12
0.34 ± 0.19
0.34 ± 0.15

in the age range of 26–40 years, three mild frail females (74–
80 years old), one moderate frail female (85 years old), and two
severe frail seniors (one female, one male; 84 and 89 years old,
respectively).
2) Training and Validation Datasets: For the final analysis
the entire dataset (n = 31) was used. Data of adults and seniors
were divided randomly into a training part (n = 15, 22–90 years
old) and a validation part (n = 16, 21–90 years old) for testing
and evaluation of the algorithm. Table I reports basic descriptive
statistics of the data employed in this analysis.
E. Data Annotation
The instants of the ICs for a series of ten consecutive steps
were identified in the acceleration data using the gold standard
(video camera). Ten was the maximum number of consecutive
steps that could be annotated correctly for all participants. ICs
of some steps were not possible to identify from the video image
due to poor illumination or interpose of walking frames in the
way between the camera and the subject’s heel.
The time needed to walk the distance between two specific
lines on the floor was extracted from the video recordings.
With this information, the average gait speed was calculated.
Although we can not exactly quantify the accuracy of the gait
speed estimated from the video data using the tracking marks
on the floor, we know that, in average, the maximum error we
can make in the annotation of the data is ±3 frames (equal to ±
0.03 s). Therefore, we can assume that the potential deviations
from the real gait speed do not impose a big impact in the final
results.
IV. EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS: WALKING
ACCELERATION PATTERNS
As explained in the gait analysis section, the IC of the foot
R
with the ground marks the beginning of a step. In the actibelt
acceleration signal, this translates into an acceleration peak in
the vertical axis at every contact of the foot with the ground, as
shown in Fig. 3(a).
In healthy adults, the peaks caused by the ICs in the vertical axis reached maximum negative values of around −1.4 g
for slow walking and −2.2 g for fast walking. This means a

Fig. 3. Acceleration near the body’s CoM of (a) a healthy young male and (b)
an elderly woman walking at normal self-selected speed. Black line corresponds
to accelerations in the anteroposterior direction, dark grey line to accelerations
in the vertical direction, and light grey line to accelerations in the mediolateral
direction.

maximum net acceleration change of 1.2 g (from −1 to −2.2 g,
where −1 g corresponds to the value measured when no other
forces than the gravity force act on the body), a value which
is consistent with the results from previous studies using force
plates [38], [47]. In the elderly group, the amplitude of the minima turned out much lower and noisier [see Fig. 3(b)], making
difficult to pinpoint the IC peaks in the vertical axis. These
changes in the amplitude were associated with the reduction
in gait speed and the flat-footed landing, usually caused by a
decreased ankle plantarflexion in older walkers [48].
To determine whether the mediolateral or the anteroposterior
accelerations could yield more reliable results in the identification of steps, independently of the subject’s age or the ability to
walk, we examined the main acceleration frequency components
(0–5 Hz [49]) of the average step for each subject and axes, and
searched for a common step pattern. In the mediolateral axis,
we found that the pattern of the average step was very idiosyncratic for each individual, which confirmed the results from an
earlier study [27]. Conversely, in the anteroposterior axis, the
average step exhibited an ascending–descending acceleration
pattern consistent for all individuals and more prominent than
in any other axis. Still, the normalized peak to peak acceleration amplitude in the group of healthy adults was in average
more than twice as high as in the frail group; and the variability,
measured as the average of the standard deviation of the steps,
increased up to three times as much with age.
The results of the exploratory data analysis evidenced: 1)
the existence of different step patterns for healthy adults and for
seniors, and 2) that the signal with a more consistent pattern in all
subjects was the signal recorded along the anteroposterior axis.
V. STEP PARAMETERIZATION
We define step parameterization as the process of identifying
and defining the parameters necessary for a relevant description
of the step pattern. Since the exploratory analysis suggested
the existence of at least two different walking patterns, we first
classified the patterns into two categories or into what we called
two different “characteristic step graphs (CSG)” and, second, we

SOAZ AND DIEPOLD: STEP DETECTION AND PARAMETERIZATION FOR GAIT ASSESSMENT USING A SINGLE WAIST-WORN

937

Fig. 4. Comparison of the average acceleration pattern (solid black line) and
standard deviation (dotted black line) in the anteroposterior axis for (a) a healthy
young individual and (b) a frail senior, walking at normal self-selected speed.

Fig. 5. Parameterized CSG for (a) normal walking (cluster B) and (b) for
impaired walking (cluster A). In dotted lines possible variations of the pattern.

defined the parameters for each of them. The parameterization
was calculated using the data from the training set.

pointing up and the foot begins to land on the middle to outside
of the heel. As the foot continues landing, the ankle plantarflexes
and, finally, the forefoot comes down.
In normal walking, when the heel of the right foot touches the
ground, the ankle of the left foot begins to plantarflex immediately bringing the left heel off the ground, and by the time the
right forefoot reaches the ground, the arch of the opposite foot
recoils bringing the toes off. The same applies to the left foot.
These actions push the body upwards and forwards bringing
a peak on the anteroposterior acceleration, the R-A (Rise and
Advance) peak.
The interval between the C point and the R-A peak corresponds to the double support phase, described in the gait theory
as the period in which both the feet are in contact with the
ground. In our analysis, this phase occupies the 22% of the step
time, or equivalently the 11% of the stride cycle for normal
walking. This finding is in agreement with the results from the
clinical literature [36].
In the elderly, the duration of the double stance is usually
bigger. Winter [48] reported a difference of more than 6% with
respect to young adults, indicating that the elderly adapt toward
a safer and more stable gait pattern. We found that the average
time spent in double stance by seniors was, in comparison with
the healthy adults, of around 11% bigger. We saw that seniors
tended to wait until the forefoot lands on the ground to start
moving the rear foot forwards, what causes a drop in the forward acceleration followed again by an increase when the calf
muscles of the rear foot begin to bring the heel off. This discontinuity in the loading response split the R–A peak in two, R
and A. The R (Rise) point corresponds to the instant at which
the forefoot of the stance leg comes down to the ground and the
A (Advance) point marks the instant that immediately precedes
the toe off. We observed that for a few seniors, the amplitude
of the R peak Δ was higher than the one for the A peak. This
is indicated in Fig. 5 with gray dotted lines. We also indicated
in gray text that the R peak was found in the pattern of several
young adults and that got filtered out when averaging all step patterns. This fine R–A separation found sometimes in the younger
group is not related to any pathological gait pattern, since
the loading response appeared totally normal and smooth, and
the participants did not report any medical condition affecting

A. Characteristic Step Graph
The CSG is defined as an standard representation of a step
pattern characteristic of individuals with similar walking ability.
R
In our study, step pattern refers to the pattern of the actibelt
acceleration signal along the anteroposterior axis during a step
cycle.
We calculated two different CSG’s by grouping the average
steps of all subjects into two categories as follows:
1) Calculation of Average Step Graph (ASG): The ASG represents the person’s average step and displays the average and
standard deviation of each acceleration sample in a step interval
for a series of ten single steps along the vertical, anteroposterior,
and mediolateral axis (see Fig. 4).
2) Normalization of the ASG: To make all the steps comparable to each other, they were normalized in time and amplitude.
Time normalization was done via linear interpolation to adjust
the step lengths to the median value of all the step durations in
the training data. The amplitude was normalized in between −1
and 1 dividing by the maximum absolute value.
3) K-Means Clustering: By applying K-means [50] clustering (with k = 2) over the normalized ASG arrays, the average
steps were grouped into two clusters: A and B. The clusters
formed thereby rely only on the characteristics of the average
step patterns. Frail seniors were classified in group A and all
nonfrail subjects, except one, were assigned to the group B. In
view of these results, the CSGs for frail and for normal walking (see Fig. 5) were chosen as the A and B cluster means,
respectively.
B. Parametric Description
Five main fiducial points were identified in the anteroposterior
direction of the normalized ASG, each of them associated with
a particular gait event. We validated them by inspecting the
acceleration data and the video recordings in slow motion in
parallel.
The C point (Contact) corresponds to the IC of the heel with
the ground. In that moment, the ankle is dorsiflexed with toes

938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

the walking ability. This fluctuation is also not necessarily
present in all the steps taken by a same individual.
The minimum and maximum difference in acceleration within
the 22% first interval found in the training data was: min Δ =
0.09 [g] for a senior, and max Δ = 1.05 [g] for a young adult.
After the R–A/A instant, the acceleration begins to decrease
until it reaches a point of Inflection I which marks the beginning
of the mid-swing phase. In that moment, the hip is pulled forward
by the concentric hip flexor and the knee extends rapidly. The
end of this phase matches the end of the leg swinging towards
a maximum extension, the so called S (Swing) peak in the step
graph.
The possible variations on the mid-swing phase were depicted
in gray in Fig. 5. The averaging of the step graphs smears out
the I and S point. But, when inspecting each single pattern, we
observed that the I and S peaks were still present for a small
group of seniors without reduced knee extension. The absence
of I–S interval seemed to be closely related to the use of walking
aid, especially a walking frame.
VI. STEP DETECTION ALGORITHM
The step detection algorithm was implemented in R language
[51]. The raw data was processed in blocks of length equal to
1000 samples and with an overlap of 200 samples.
The step detection algorithm is divided in three main parts:
recognition of regions of interest, estimation of ICs, and template matching.

B. Estimation of ICs
The step detection is based on the detection of the greatest
local minima in the anteroposterior axis, which corresponds
to the instants of the ICs. These local minima are sometimes
difficult to discriminate due to undesired fluctuations in the
signal, usually produced by abdominal fat oscillations or by the
hip extension. To remove these fluctuations, we applied a lowpass Butterworth filter (n = 4) of cutoff frequency fc = 2 Hz
to the anteroposterior acceleration an z . The cutoff frequency
of the filter was calculated empirically using the training data.
After that, we calculated the minima nmin
nmin = {n ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N | ãzn −1 − ãzn > 0 ∧

A. Recognition of Regions of Interest
Walking implies the realization of a certain level of physical
activity (PA) and to maintain an approximately upright standing
posture. Using the capacity of the device as inclinometer and
measuring the magnitude of the accelerations near the CoM,
we can estimate which regions may contain walking segments.
To identify these regions of interest, we first excluded from the
analysis all intervals where the body orientation was considered
not to be upright. Based on previous findings [14], we assumed
an upright posture if the angle formed by the trunk with the
anteroposterior axis φB is smaller than 45◦ (ignoring possible
sensor tilt). Second, we excluded regions of low activity or motionless. The signal used to estimate the PA level while walking,
gn , was obtained by differentiation of the acceleration vector in
the anteroposterior plane,
gn = |vn +1 − vn |

Fig. 6. Dots in black are the ICs detected using the algorithm. The grey line
is the anteroposterior acceleration (g units) and the black line is the low-pass
filtered version. Vertical lines correspond to the annotated ICs.

(1)


where vn = (an x )2 + (an z )2 with an x and an y equal to the
acceleration values along the vertical and anteroposterior axis,
respectively.
The decision threshold for the PA levels was calculated empirically as the minimum value of gn among all walking segments
in the training dataset. Prior to calculation of this threshold,
the signal gn was smoothed with a Gaussian filter ( σ1 = 2.5) of
length L = 400 samples to guarantee that adjacent regions with
similar PA level were merged together.

ãzn +1 − ãzn < 0}

(2)

ãzn

in the filtered signal
by differentiation.
Each local minima marks off the interval I
I = [nmin , nmin + Tmin )

(3)

where to search for the ICs in the anteroposterior axis azn . The
duration of the interval, Tmin was chosen equal to 0.24 s, the
inverse of the usual maximum step frequency during running
[53]. In elderly people, the minimum step durations can reach
values equal to 0.4 s when walking faster [54].
The first approximation of the ICs ĉi are the minima of the
acceleration signal in the interval I along the anteroposterior
axis, calculated again like in (2).
The next task is to verify whether each segment
ŝ = {azn | n ∈ [ĉi , ĉi+1 )}

(4)

between two consecutive estimations of the ICs fits in the parametric description of a step.
The first condition that the vector ŝ needs to fulfill to be
considered as a step is to present a maximum of amplitude
Δ ≥ min Δ, with min Δ = 0.09 [g], in the the first 22% of the
interval. This maximum usually corresponds to the R–A/A point
in normal walking and to the R point in impaired walking (see
Fig. 6). The I and S fiducial peaks were not considered for the
step detection because they are not always present in the signal.
The second condition is that the length of the vector ŝ in seconds

SOAZ AND DIEPOLD: STEP DETECTION AND PARAMETERIZATION FOR GAIT ASSESSMENT USING A SINGLE WAIST-WORN

should not be bigger than Tmax = 2. Tmax is considered an upper
limit for the step duration and was estimated as approximately
the double of the biggest step duration measured in the training
data set (1.06 s).
The vectors that satisfy both conditions are the estimations of
the real steps and they are denoted as s.

One of the most challenging tasks in step detection under
uncontrolled environment is the ability of the algorithm to distinguish between real steps and activities with similar acceleration patterns. In order to reduce the number of false positives,
we measured the similarity of each of the signals previously
estimated as true steps s with a template t and, depending on
this value, we decided whether the signal s fits the shape of a
standard step acceleration pattern or not. The normalized cross
correlation between both signals, defined as
γs,t

L
1  (sj − μs )(tj − μt )
=
√
L j =1
σs σt

predicted

max(γs,t 1 , γs,t 2 ) < 0.70

normal

9
1

0
5

predicted

actual

frail
normal

frail

normal

7
0

5
4

(a) k = 2
predicted

(6)

were considered not to fit the standard. The value 0.70 corresponds to the lowest value of the normalized cross correlation
between the templates t1 and t2 and the steps annotated in the
training data set.
VII. VALIDATION
We calculated CSGs using the steps annotated with the gold
standard in the validation data set, to cross check the results
obtained with the training part.
To validate the step detection algorithm, we calculated the
sensitivity S and the positive predictive value (P P V ) regarding
number of steps, and the average error E for the detection of
the IC instants. The sensitivity is defined as the number of steps
correctly detected by the algorithm (true positives) divided by
the total number of steps. The P P V represents the ratio of true
positives to combined true and false positives. And the average
error E is an average of the difference between the real instant
of the IC and the one detected by the algorithm
1  A lg
|c
− cGold
|
i
n i=1 i

frail
normal

frail

TABLE III
CONFUSION MATRIX OF THE K-MEANS CLASSIFICATION IN FRAIL/NORMAL
WALKING FOR THE VALIDATION SET BEFORE (A) AND AFTER (B) THE
REMOVAL OF OUTLIERS

(5)

was used as similarity measure. In (5), the scalars μ and σ denote
the average and the standard deviation, and L is the length of
the template.
The CSG for normal t1 and for frail walking t2 were used
as templates. And the length of the step s was adjusted to the
length of the template by linear interpolation.
The steps with a maximum normalized cross correlation

n

E :=

TABLE II
CONFUSION MATRIX OF THE K-MEANS (k = 2) CLASSIFICATION IN
FRAIL/NORMAL WALKING FOR THE TRAINING SET

actual

C. Template Matching

939

(7)

lg
are the ICs detected with the algorithm and cGold
are
where cA
i
i
the ones annotated with the gold standard for each step i.
To evaluate the walking-like data, we calculated the false
positive rate (F P R). The F P R is defined as the average number
of false positives per minute.

actual

frail
normal

frail
7
0

normal
2
4

(b) k = 3

VIII. RESULTS
A. CSG Cross Check
All frail subjects in the training data (n = 9, 77–90 years old)
were correctly classified by the K-means algorithm (k = 2) in
the group labeled as frail, whereas 83.3% of nonfrail subjects (n
= 5, four adults in the range 22–36 years and one 67 year-old
man) were assigned to the “normal” group. Only one 65 yearold healthy adult with speed = 1.01 m/s was assigned to the frail
group. The confusion matrix for this classification is shown in
Table II.
The classification of the K-means algorithm using the validation data produced less accurate results that in the training set,
with five misclassified frail subjects, as shown in Table III(a).
Among these five subjects, two presented the highest speed in
the frail group (0.62 and 0.66 m/s). The three remaining presented extreme to very low speeds (between 0.12 and 0.36 m/s),
which evidenced their condition as outliers. To confirm this
assumption, we applied K-means clustering with k = 3 and observed that three misclassified samples with lower gait speed
were grouped together in a new cluster. Table III(b) shows the
confusion matrix after the removal of outliers. The still misclassification of the two patterns corresponding to gait speeds in
the range 0.6–0.7 m/s suggests that the ASG may still present
characteristics of a normal walking pattern at those speeds.
The cluster means of the validation data set produced almost
identical CSGs as the ones depicted in Fig. 5 for the training
data set. The ASG of seniors who used a walking frame [see
Fig. 7(b)] in comparison with seniors who did not use one [see
Fig. 7(a)] revealed that, for the first group, the interval I–S tends

940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

TABLE V
FALSE STEP RATE IN WALKING-LIKE MOVEMENTS WITH (F P R t ) AND
WITHOUT (F P R) TEMPLATE MATCHING
Movement description
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Sitting and moving heel up-and-down
On tiptoes and lowering back down
Sit-ups
Push-ups
Standing toe-touch
Shaking sensor up-down
Shaking sensor backward-forward
Shaking sensor left-right
Cycling

F P R [steps/min]

F P R t [steps/min]

0.0
20.0
0.0
0.0
3.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
96.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0

Fig. 7. ASG of seniors (a) without walking frame (n = 10) and (b) with a
walking frame (n = 11).
TABLE IV
AVERAGE ERROR (E) AND SENSITIVITY WITH (S t ) AND WITHOUT (S)
TEMPLATE MATCHING
Speed (m/s)
normal
slow
Vslow
Xslow

0.75
0.50
0.20
0.10

≤v
≤v
≤v
≤v

<
<
<
<

1.50
0.75
0.50
0.20

n

S (% )

E (sec)

S t (% )

4
5
5
2

100
98.0
100
45.0

0.02
0.04
0.06
0.06

97.5
76.0
80.0
35.0

to disappear and the amplitude of the R peak was in average
smaller than the amplitude of the A peak.
B. Algorithm Performance
The accuracy of the step detection algorithm depends on the
walking speed. The spectrum of gait speeds in the validation
data set ranged from 0.12 m/s, for the most functional impaired
senior, to 1.47 m/s. We categorized the gait speeds in: normal,
slow, very slow (Vslow), and extremely slow (Xslow) as defined
in Table IV. The sensitivity was equal to 99.33% for speeds
between 0.20–1.5 m/s and without the use of template matching.
Overall, sensitivity was reduced by 27.03% when using template
matching.
The minimum and maximum error in the IC detection was
equal to 20 and 60 ms, respectively.
The sensitivity and average error of the algorithm are detailed
in Table IV according to different speed intervals.
No false positives were found in the validation set, which
means that the P P V was equal to 100%. For the walkinglike data, the F P R, with and without template matching, is
presented in Table V.
Among all walking-like activities, cycling produced the
higher number of false positives with a considerable high rate
(F P R =96.0 steps/min). However, when applying template
matching, the false step rate during cycling was reduced by
72.9%, and it reached zero for the rest of activities.
IX. DISCUSSION
The results of the exploratory data analysis have shown that
R
signal during walking were consisthe changes in the actibelt
tent with the qualitative and quantitative description of the gait

phases found in the clinical literature [36], [48], and with other
previous studies using force plates [37], [38] and accelerometers
[27], [30].
The axis with a more congruent step pattern for all subjects
was the anteroposterior axis, and the minima in the signal along
this direction corresponded to the heel strikes. An additional
investigation would be required to determine whether the use
of combined data from multiple axis could improve the performance of the step detection.
The CSG has been demonstrated to be a useful model to represent the general dynamics of the step pattern in adults and
in the elderly, independently of inter and intraindividual fluctuations in signal amplitude and step duration (fluctuations in
amplitude and time are eliminated during the process of averaging and normalization of the step pattern, respectively). Some
of the major limb movements and forces acting on the muscles
during walking, like: the flexion of the foot, the knee extension,
and the the maximum forces of the heel strike and the forefoot
loading, were manifested in the CSG. For a small group of individuals, we found considerable variations between their average
step pattern and their corresponding CSG. It should be further
investigated to what extent these variations may result from the
effect of the walking speed, walking aid, or from other factors
related to aging, such as loss of strength and flexibility. Some
gait movements, like for example the knee flexion, has been
shown to be related to walking speed [55]. For that reason, it
is essential that in the future, normal ranges for gait parameters
are defined with reference to walking speed.
The performance of the algorithm presented in this study is
superior if we compared it to the results from other studies using
a single waist-worn accelerometer in frail seniors or seniors
walking at low speeds. In particular, Storti et al. [32] reported a
relative error equal to 19.1% for speeds lower than 0.8 m/s, and
Marschollek et al. [33] obtained a minimum relative error of
28.1% on a group of mobility-impaired older people. Dijkstra
et al. [34] reported a mean absolute percentage error in the
detection of steps equal to 4.3 ± 1.1%; however, the sample
included in their study was comprised of young seniors (in
average, 68.5 ± 7.4 years old) and they did not specified numeric
values for slow pace walking. In our study, we achieved a relative
error equal to 10.0% for gait speeds less than 0.75 m/s without
template matching, and a mean sensitivity equal to 99 ± 1%
for walking speeds comprised between 0.20–1.5 m/s. At speeds

SOAZ AND DIEPOLD: STEP DETECTION AND PARAMETERIZATION FOR GAIT ASSESSMENT USING A SINGLE WAIST-WORN

lower than 0.20 m/s, only 45% of the steps taken could be
detected by our algorithm.
We obtained an average error in the detection of the ICs equal
to 0.05 s for low speeds (<0.75 m/s) and 0.02 s for normal
speeds (>0.75 m/s). We did not find reference values in frail
senior populations to compare these results with. But, there
exist studies in healthy individuals that reported maximum and
minimum absolute errors in the detection of the ICs equal to
0.103 and 0.002 s, respectively [27]. The differences in timing
between the real heel strikes and those detected by our algorithm
may be affected by the accuracy with which the video data was
annotated. In the worst case, this difference was estimated to be
equal to 0.03 s.
The utilization of template matching reduced false positives
and also the sensitivity of the step counter. Given that this technique is very sensitive to changes in gait profile, possible approaches to increase the accuracy of the step detection are to
employ different gait templates, such as templates derived from
pathological gaits, or to use templates adapted to each person.
However, these approaches would probably increase the processing time and computational load, or may require the use of
supervised learning for each particular gait pattern. In controlled
environments, like in clinical settings, when the measurements
are restricted to walking activities, applying template matching
may not present any advantage.
Despite including diverse step patterns and gait speeds in this
study, each subject was only tested for one trial of self-selected
normal speed. Further validations using bigger data sets, including several trials, different speeds, and ideally some pathological
gaits, would be needed. It would be also important to assess the
ecological validity of the step detector in uncontrolled environments, like in the community or at home, where walking is not
limited to a straight walk and the effects of accelerations and
decelerations during walking may affect the performance.
X. CONCLUSION
Systems using a single 3-D accelerometer are a promising
technology for reliable long-term evaluation of physical functioning, and monitoring of exercise therapy or medication interventions. The placement of the sensor inside a buckle of a
normal belt guarantees a limited obtrusiveness, and the fixed
location near the CoM of the body has been shown to provide
reliable information to detect steps with a high sensitivity, even
in frail seniors walking at relatively low speeds. Furthermore, we
have shown that using a single waist-worn acceleration sensor
is possible to distinguish in the acceleration signal some of the
major forces responsible for the control of the gait. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study that has identified fiducial
points in acceleration step patterns with clinical significance for
the gait assessment of older adults. The system presented in this
paper could be useful to identify and monitor seniors at high risk
of decline in gait performance, via step counting and analysis
of their acceleration patterns.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank N. G. Póveda, M. Schabl,
J. Feldmaier, and Bellavista and Sonnengarten Nursing Home

941

staff for their help with the data collection. They also would like
to thank Dr. M. Daumer the Director of the SLCMSR e.v.—The
Human Motion Institute and Managing Director of the IT company Trium Analysis Online GmbH, for suggesting the topic,
for technological and methodological support and for access to
the know-how and background IP within SLCMSR/Trium to
make this study possible. Responsibility for the content of this
publication lies with the authors and does not necessarily reflect
official opinion of SLCMSR/Trium.
REFERENCES
[1] Ageing and Life Course. Facts about ageing (2014). [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/ageing/about/facts/en/
[2] T. M. Gill et al., “A program to prevent functional decline in physically
frail, elderly persons who live at home,” New England J. Med., vol. 347,
no. 14, pp. 1068–1074, 2002.
[3] V. Scott et al., “Multifactorial and functional mobility assessment tools
for fall risk among older adults in community, home-support, long-term
and acute care settings,” Age Ageing, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 130–139, 2007.
[4] K. Kowalski et al., “Direct and indirect measurement of physical activity
in older adults: A systematic review of the literature,” Int. J. Behavioral
Nutrition Phys. Activity, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 148, 2012.
R
[5] H. B. Menz et al., “Reliability of the gaitrite
walkway system for the
quantification of temporo-spatial parameters of gait in young and older
people,” Gait Posture, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 20–25, 2004.
[6] M. A. Schimpl, “Association between walking speed and age in healthy,
free-living individuals using mobile accelerometry—A cross-sectional
study,” PLoS One, vol. 6, no. 8, p. e23299, 2011.
[7] N. Wang et al., “Accelerometry based classification of walking patterns
using time-frequency analysis,” in Proc. 29th Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, pp. 4899–4902.
[8] R. K. Ibrahim et al., “Gait pattern classification using compact features
extracted from intrinsic mode functions,” in Proc. 30th Ann. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, pp. 3852–3855.
[9] K. Aminian et al., “Foot worn inertial sensors for gait assessment and
rehabilitation based on motorized shoes,” in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 5820–5823.
[10] L. Palmerini et al., “Quantification of motor impairment in Parkinson’s
disease using an instrumented timed up and go test,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 664–673, Jul. 2013.
[11] M. R. Narayanan et al., “Longitudinal falls-risk estimation using triaxial
accelerometry,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 534–541,
Mar. 2010.
[12] K. Culhane et al., “Accelerometers in rehabilitation medicine for older
adults,” Age Ageing, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 556–560, 2005.
[13] F. Bianchi et al., “Barometric pressure and triaxial accelerometry-based
falls event detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18,
no. 6, pp. 619–627, Dec. 2010.
[14] C. Soaz et al., “A new method to estimate the real upper limit of the
false alarm rate in a 3 accelerometry-based fall detector for the elderly,”
in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 244–247.
[15] F. Bagalà et al., “Evaluation of accelerometer-based fall detection algorithms on real-world falls,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 5, p. e37062, 2012.
[16] L. P. Fried et al., “Frailty in older adults evidence for a phenotype,” J.
Gerontol. Series A: Biol. Sci. Med. Sci., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. M146–M157,
2001.
[17] M.-V. Castell et al. (2013). Frailty prevalence and slow walking speed
in persons age 65 and older: Implications for primary care. BMC Family Practice [Online]. 14(1), p. 86. Available: http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1471-2296/14/86
[18] E. Fortune et al., “Validity of using tri-axial accelerometers to measure
human movement–part ii: Step counts at a wide range of gait velocities,”
Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 659–669, 2014.
[19] E. Haeuber et al., “Accelerometer monitoring of home-and communitybased ambulatory activity after stroke,” Archives Phys. Med. Rehabil.,
vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 1997–2001, 2004.
[20] B. Resnick et al., “Measurement of activity in older adults: reliability
and validity of the step activity monitor,” J. Nursing Meas., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 275–290, 2001.
[21] S. H. Roy et al., “A combined sEMG and accelerometer system for monitoring functional activity in stroke,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 585–594, Dec. 2009.

942

[22] I. Cleland et al., “Optimal placement of accelerometers for the detection
of everyday activities,” Sensors, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 9183–9200, 2013.
[23] C.-C. Yang and Y.-L. Hsu, “A review of accelerometry-based wearable motion detectors for physical activity monitoring,” Sensors, vol. 10,
no. 8, pp. 7772–7788, 2010.
[24] H.-K. Lee et al., “Novel algorithm for the hemiplegic gait evaluation
using a single 3-axis accelerometer,” in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 3964–3966.
[25] H. Lee et al., “Computational methods to detect step events for normal
and pathological gait evaluation using accelerometer,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 46, no. 17, pp. 1185–1187, 2010.
[26] K. Umemura et al., “Analysis of human walking by 3-D acceleration sensor and its application,” in Proc. IEEE SICE Ann. Conf., 2008,
pp. 1723–1726.
[27] W. Zijlstra and A. L. Hof, “Assessment of spatio-temporal gait parameters
from trunk accelerations during human walking,” Gait Posture, vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 1–10, 2003.
[28] K. M. Foglyano et al., “Development of a self-contained accelerometry
based system for control of functional electrical stimulation in hemiplegia,” in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 5448–5451.
[29] A. Mansfield and G. M. Lyons, “The use of accelerometry to detect heel
contact events for use as a sensor in FES assisted walking,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 879–885, 2003.
[30] R. C. González et al., “Real-time gait event detection for normal subjects
from lower trunk accelerations,” Gait Posture, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 322–325,
2010.
[31] M. Yoneyama et al., “Accelerometry-based gait analysis and its application to parkinson’s disease assessment part 1: Detection of stride event,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 613–622, May
2014.
[32] K. L. Storti et al., “Gait speed and step-count monitor accuracy in
community-dwelling older adults,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 40,
no. 1, p. 59, 2008.
[33] M. Marschollek et al., “A performance comparison of accelerometrybased step detection algorithms on a large, non-laboratory sample of
healthy and mobility-impaired persons,” in Proc. 30th Ann. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, pp. 1319–1322.
[34] B. Dijkstra et al., “Detection of walking periods and number of steps
in older adults and patients with Parkinson’s disease: Accuracy of a pedometer and an accelerometry-based method,” Age Ageing, vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 436–441, 2008.
[35] S. Shultz et al., Examination of Musculoskeletal Injuries with Web Resource. Windsor, ON, USA: Human Kinetics Publishers, 2009.
[36] J. Perry et al., “Gait analysis: Normal and pathological function,” J.
Pediatric Orthopaedics, vol. 12, no. 6, p. 815, 1992.
[37] J. Perttunen, Foot Loading in Normal and Pathological Walking.
Jyväskylä, Finland: Univ. Jyväskylä, 2002.
[38] J. Nilsson and A. Thorstensson, “Ground reaction forces at different
speeds of human walking and running,” Acta Physiologica Scandinavica,
vol. 136, no. 2, pp. 217–227, 1989.
[39] A. Hreljac, “Impact and overuse injuries in runners,” Med. Sci. Sports
Exercise, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 845–849, 2004.
[40] E. Ayyappa, “Normal human locomotion, part 2: Motion, ground-reaction
force and muscle activity,” J. Prosthetics Orthotics, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 49–57, 1997.
[41] R. Bogey and T. L. Massagli, “Gait analysis,” Web MD Professional,
Medscape Oct, 29(2009.1993).
[42] A. De Cock et al., “Temporal characteristics of foot roll-over during
barefoot jogging: reference data for young adults,” Gait Posture, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 432–439, 2005.
[43] Picture of Walking Person Silhouette. Public Domain CC0. (Original
picture by OCAL). (2014). [Online]. Available: http://www.pixabay.com
[44] M. Daumer et al., “Steps towards a miniaturized, robust and autonomous
measurement device for the long-term monitoring of patient activity:
ActiBelt,” Biomedizinische Technik, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 149–155, 2007.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

R
[45] “Photo of the actibelt
sensor on a proband,” presented at the VPHOP
Meeting, Berlin, Germany, 2009.
[46] T. Öberg et al., “Basic gait parameters: reference data for normal subjects,
10-79 years of age,” J. Rehab. Res. Develop., vol. 30, pp. 210–210, 1993.
[47] T. Keller et al., “Relationship between vertical ground reaction force
and speed during walking, slow jogging, and running,” Clin. Biomechan.,
vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 253–259, 1996.
[48] D. A. O. Winter, “Biomechanical walking pattern changes in the fit and
healthy elderly,” Phys. Therapy, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 340–347, 1990.
[49] A. Cappozzo, “Low frequency self-generated vibration during ambulation
in normal men,” J. Biomechan., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 599–609, 1982.
[50] J. A. Hartigan and M. A. Wong, “Algorithm AS 136: A k-means clustering
algorithm,” Appl. Statistics, vol. 28, pp. 100–108, 1979.
[51] R. Development Core Team (2011), “R: A language and environment for
statistical computing,” R Found. Statist. Comput., ISBN: 3-900051-07-0.
Available online at http://www.R-project.org/.
[52] F. Franzelin, “IT-Tools zur On- und Offline Analyse von Einzelschritten
R
die mit dem hochaulösenden 3D-Akzelerometer actibelt
aufgezeichnet
werden,” Bachelorarbeit Informatik. Technische Universität München,
2009.
[53] R. Blickhan, “The spring-mass model for running and hopping,” J.
Biomechan., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1217–1227, 1989.
[54] A. Zijlstra et al., “The step length–frequency relationship in physically
active community-dwelling older women,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 104,
no. 3, pp. 427–434, 2008.
[55] C. Kirtley et al., “Influence of walking speed on gait parameters,” J.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 282–288, 1985.

Cristina Soaz received the Master’s degree in
telecommunications engineering from the University
of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, in 2008, and the Dr.-Ing. degree
in electrical engineering from Technical University of
Munich, Munich, Germany, in 2015.
Before starting her doctoral studies, she was a Software Developer at the University of Vigo in 2008 and
as a Marie Curie Fellow at the Sylvia Lawry Centre for Multiple Sclerosis Research-The Human Motion Institute on mobile accelerometer-based clinical
applications (2009–2012). In November 2012, she
joined the Institute for Data Processing of the Technical University of Munich
as a Doctoral Student. Her research interest includes the development of technologies for activity monitoring and for human movement analysis.

Klaus Diepold received the Dipl.-Ing. degree and
the Dr.-Ing. degree both in electrical engineering
from Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany, in 1987 and 1992, respectively.
In the years 1993–2002, he was with the video
signal processing, television, and video compression
industry, and leading the research lab of DynaPel
Systems, Inc., Munich. In 2002, he joined TUM as a
Full Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology. His main interest includes the computational aspects of multimedia
signal processing and machine learning. He is the Scientific Director of the
“Centre for Digital Technology and Management”. Since 2013, he serves as the
Senior Vice President of the TUM responsible for Diversity and Talent Management.

