1016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

A Method for Automatic and Objective Scoring
of Bradykinesia Using Orientation Sensors
and Classification Algorithms
O. Martinez-Manzanera∗ , E. Roosma, M. Beudel, R. W. K. Borgemeester, T. van Laar, and N. M. Maurits

Abstract—Correct assessment of bradykinesia is a key element in the diagnosis and monitoring of Parkinson’s disease. Its
evaluation is based on a careful assessment of symptoms and it
is quantified using rating scales, where the Movement Disorders
Society-Sponsored Revision of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) is the gold standard. Regardless of their
importance, the bradykinesia-related items show low agreement
between different evaluators. In this study, we design an applicable
tool that provides an objective quantification of bradykinesia and
that evaluates all characteristics described in the MDS-UPDRS.
Twenty-five patients with Parkinson’s disease performed three of
the five bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS. Their
movements were assessed by four evaluators and were recorded
with a nine degrees-of-freedom sensor. Sensor fusion was employed to obtain a 3-D representation of movements. Based on
the resulting signals, a set of features related to the characteristics described in the MDS-UPDRS was defined. Feature selection
methods were employed to determine the most important features
to quantify bradykinesia. The features selected were used to train
support vector machine classifiers to obtain an automatic score
of the movements of each patient. The best results were obtained
when seven features were included in the classifiers. The classification errors for finger tapping, diadochokinesis and toe tapping were
15–16.5%, 9.3–9.8%, and 18.2–20.2% smaller than the average interrater scoring error, respectively. The introduction of objective
scoring in the assessment of bradykinesia might eliminate inconsistencies within evaluators and interrater assessment disagreements
and might improve the monitoring of movement disorders.
Index Terms—Bradykinesia, clinical diagnosis, computer-aided
diagnosis, sensor fusion, supervised learning, support vector machines (SVMs).

I. INTRODUCTION
RADYKINESIA is defined as slowness of movement [1]
and is one of the main symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
(PD) [2]. Its accurate evaluation is essential for correct diagnosis and monitoring of PD. The gold standard for assessing

B

Manuscript received May 1, 2015; revised July 16, 2015; accepted September
15, 2015. Date of publication September 18, 2015; date of current version May
19, 2016. This work was supported in part by the Mexican National Council for
Science and Technology (CONACYT).Personal use of this material is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be obtained
from the IEEE by sending an email to pubs-permissions@ieee.org. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ O. Martinez-Manzanera is with the Department of Neurology, University
Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 GZ Groningen, Netherlands (e-mail:
o.e.martinez.manzanera@umcg.nl).
E. Roosma is with the Martini Hospital.
M. Beudel, R. W. K. Borgemeester, T. van Laar, and N. M. Maurits are with
the Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2480242

its severity and that of other movement disorder’s symptoms is
the evaluation by a well-trained clinician using standard clinical
rating scales [3]. While a physical examination of the patient
and a careful evaluation of the symptoms are required for the
assessment of bradykinesia, rating scales are employed to express its severity as a quantity. The most widely used for PD
is the Movement Disorders Society-Sponsored Revision of the
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) [4].
In its motor evaluation section, it defines a series of tasks that
are performed by the patient and the movement performance
characteristics that should be assessed. The assessment is represented by a sum score that summarizes movement performance.
However, in spite of its ubiquitous use, the evaluation of the
bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS shows low interrater agreement between movement disorders specialists [1].
This limitation hampers the evaluation of bradykinesia and the
diagnosis and monitoring of PD. An objective, unbiased scoring
of these items of the MDS-UPDRS could improve the evaluation
of bradykinesia.
The characteristics that are evaluated for the bradykinesiarelated items of the MDS-UPDRS include amplitude, speed,
hesitations, halts, and any variability or changes in these features over time [4]. The objective measurement and analysis of
these characteristics (or very similar ones) has been the goal of
previous studies [1], [2], [5]–[10]. Different sensors or combinations of sensors have been employed, such as accelerometers
[1], [2], [6], gyroscopes [1], [7], [8], magnetic sensors [9], and
tactile screens [10]. This resulted in a wide variety of measurement systems and methodologies that have allowed for bradykinesia assessments to be extended to even outside the hospital
[8], [11]. In recent years, the modified bradykinesia rating scale
(MBRS), which assesses amplitude, speed, and rhythm of movements with individual scores was introduced [12]. Its reliability
has been evaluated with motion sensors in different tasks [1],
[13], [14]. While it provides increased sensitivity in identifying different components of bradykinesia, it shares some of the
limitations of the UPDRS because it also relies on subjective
clinical judgment [1]. In spite of good results, these objective
assessments are still not commonly used and the MDS-UPDRS
remains the gold standard for the quantification of bradykinesia
[15]. In order to bring objective and unbiased assessment tools
to clinical practice, the gap between current subjective clinical
rating scales and the wide variety of sensors and methods used
for objective assessment of bradykinesia needs to be closed.
Current assessment of bradykinesia is impaired by two
inherent inconveniences: the evaluator’s individual bias and

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MARTINEZ-MANZANERA et al.: METHOD FOR AUTOMATIC AND OBJECTIVE SCORING OF BRADYKINESIA USING ORIENTATION SENSORS

inconsistency and scale limitations due to the limited number of
categories of the scale [16]. In a separate study [16], we propose
a solution to the problem of the limited number of categories.
Here, we propose an automatic and objective method for assessment of the bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS
that uses a supervised classification algorithm (support vector
machine (SVM) based) to reproduce the evaluators’ classification results. Specifically, to bridge the gap between the current
quantification of bradykinesia and automatic measurement and
assessment tools, we base our analysis on data that are highly
comparable to what an evaluator can observe and define features
that are very similar to the characteristics that are evaluated for
the bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS.
The most accurate technique to monitor human movements
in a research setting is by using optical motion analysis systems [3]. However, such systems impose many restrictions that
make them unsuitable for routine clinical assessment. Instead, to
obtain an accurate description of movement, a nine degrees-offreedom (9DoF) sensor (Shimmer [17], Dublin, Ireland, version
2r, composed of three accelerometers, three gyroscopes, and
three magnetic sensors) was employed to capture movement
performance. By integrating the information of each individual
signal using a sensor fusion algorithm an accurate estimate of
3-D movement was obtained. The result of this algorithm, in the
form of quaternions, was transformed to Euler angles. By selecting the Euler angle that best represented the observed movement
for the specific MDS-UPDRS item, and subsequently, extracting features that are very similar to the characteristics defined in
the MDS-UPDRS, we ensured that the automatic measurement
and assessment method was highly comparable to the current
quantification of bradykinesia.
To objectively evaluate movement performance, we employed SVMs. An SVM classifier can include every feature
available, but this might result in overfitting and poor classification performance due to the curse of dimensionality [18].
Alternatively, the classifier can only include the features that
produce an improvement on the classification. However, this
can result in the exclusion of some important features. We took
a middle way between these two methods and included two
features a priori that can be related to two important characteristics described in the MDS-UPDRS (amplitude and speed),
and then, included additional features into the classifier based
on their performance. An alternative approach to reduce data
dimensionality, and thereby, avoid the curse of dimensionality
is principal component analysis (PCA). We explored this alternative approach as well, as features based on principal components will express more of the variance recorded by the sensors
and may, therefore, result in a better classifier. These two approaches were adopted to evaluate whether features from expert
knowledge obtain a better performance over features from dimensionality reduction.
To determine which features should be included in the classifier, an iterative method (forward-selection wrapper [19]) was
used. In each iteration, an extra feature was included in the
classifier, based on the classifier performance. This process was
repeated until there was no improvement in the performance of
the classifier.

1017

The SVM is a supervised classifier that learns from given
labels. The scores from evaluators were used as labels to train
the classifier. The performance of the classifier was obtained
using leave-one-out cross validation [20] (LOOCV), which is a
technique used to estimate the classification error on new data.
In this study, we aim to obtain an objective evaluation
of bradykinesia that eliminates inconsistency of an evaluator.
Different evaluators might weight movement characteristics differently. Therefore, the features selection procedure was performed using the scores of four clinical evaluators, separately.
This resulted in four different classifiers (for each MDS-UPDRS
bradykinesia-related item) that learned from different labels and
that might include different features. The classification error of
these classifiers was averaged for each iteration and these averages were compared against the interrater scoring error to assess
the performance of our automatic measurement and assessment
methods.
II. METHODS
Twenty-five patients with mild to moderate PD (age: 64.4 ±
1.7 y, 13 male, 12 female, SCOPA-COG cognition test: 30.0 ±
1.0) and ten age-matched controls (age: 65.2 ± 3.2 y, 6 male,
4 female, SCOPA-COG cognition test: 28.5 ± 1.4). Every participant performed items 3.4 (finger tapping), 3.6 (diadochokinesis), and 3.7 (toe tapping) of the motor examination section of
the MDS-UPDRS with both right and left limbs. All participants
were asked to perform the tasks as fast and accurately as possible. Controls were included to evaluate the relevance of features
included a priori in the classifier. For every patient, each task
was videoed and later scored by four well-trained clinicians
according to the guidelines of the MDS-UPDRS. The study
was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of
Helsinki (2008) with prior approval of the Ethics committee of
the University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG).
A. Signal acquisition
Before each task was performed, a 9DoF orientation sensor
was placed on the specific body part of interest. For finger tapping, the sensor was placed on the dorsal side of the proximal
phalange of the index finger. For diadochokinesis, the sensor
was placed on the dorsal side of the forearm close to the wrist.
Finally, for toe tapping, the sensor was placed on the instep
of the foot over the shoe of the participant. Each 9DoF sensor
incorporates nine internal sensors (three accelerometers, three
gyroscopes, and three magnetic sensors), where sensors of the
same type are orthogonally aligned to each other. Before every
measurement, each sensor was calibrated using the Shimmer
9DoF Calibration v2.3 [17] application. This prevented misalignment of the electronic board containing the internal sensors with the outer case and ensured proper recording of the
magnetic sensors. All signals were recorded at a sampling rate
of 51.2 Hz and streamed via Bluetooth to a computer.
B. Sensor Fusion
To reduce the effects of noise and to obtain a more accurate estimate of movement, all signals from each sensor were

1018

Fig. 1. Left: Orientation sensor on index finger for finger tapping task (top)
and its corresponding model (bottom). Right: Orientation sensor on the wrist
for diadochokinesis task (top) and its corresponding model (bottom).

combined with a sensor fusion algorithm [21] that allows the
estimation of the spatial orientation parameters of the 9DoF
sensor. This algorithm, based on quaternions, achieves the level
of accuracy of a Kalman filter (which is considered the most
popular probabilistic fusion algorithm [22]) without the computational expense that the latter requires [21]. The quaternion
representation of an orientation vector used in this algorithm
has the advantage that it is not affected by singularities (gimbal
lock) associated with Euler angles [21] that affect other algorithms. The output of the algorithm in the form of quaternions
was converted to Euler angles. Since for each task, most of the
movement can be described by a single Euler angle (for finger
tapping by the angle that describes the flexion and extension
of the index finger, for diadochokinesis by the angle that describes the pronation and supination of the wrist and for toe
tapping by the angle that describes the dorsiflexion and plantar
flexion of the foot) the analysis of each tasks was performed
on the corresponding Euler angle signal that explained most of
movement.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 2. Example of raw angle signal (gray) and smoothing spline angle (black)
signal for diadochokinesis. The frequency of each tap is obtained as the inverse
of the time (t) between consecutive peaks. In the figure, the frequency of tap six
was defined as the inverse of the time difference between the sixth and the fifth
peaks. The amplitude of each tap is obtained as the difference in amplitude from
a peak to the next valley. In the figure, the amplitude of tap eight was defined as
the amplitude difference between the eighth peak and the eighth valley.

was used to fit each signal (see Fig. 2) using a smoothing parameter [25] ρ = 0.1 (1). With this approach, the fitted spline
does not go through every single point of the original signal but
only represents the general pattern of the signal. The function
that was minimized to obtain the smoothing spline is given as
  2 2

d s
2
wi (yi + s (xi )) + (1 − ρ)
.
(1)
ρ
dx2
i
Here, ρ is the smoothing parameter and wi is the specified
weight of data point i. The first term is the mean squared error
(MSE) when the curve s, which is a function of x, is used to
predict y. The second term is an added penalty function that
limits the curvature of s [26]. Two versions of each signal were
thus obtained: one with more detail (raw angle (RA) signal)
and one with less detail (smoothing spline angle (SSA) signal).
Features were subsequently extracted from these two signals.
E. Determination of Features

C. User Interface
Shimmer provides a basic acquisition program in LabView
[23] (Austin, Texas, USA.) that includes a three dimensional
representation of a 9DoF sensor. This program was modified to
display a 3-D model that represents the body parts involved in
each movement (see Fig. 1 for two examples). This representation allowed visual identification of improper calibration as
indicated by false rotational movements in the model for motionless sensors and verification that the recording procedure
was correctly performed (sensors placed incorrectly would be
indicated by unusual movements of the model).
D. Signal Processing
By nature, human body movements are limited to a maximum
frequency of 20 Hz [24]. Therefore, to decrease artifacts such
as drift and the noise produced by the main electrical power
line, the signals were band-pass filtered between 0.3 and 20 Hz
(second-order Butterworth filter). Then, to obtain a smoother
version of the signals for feature extraction, spline interpolation

To obtain features related to the characteristics defined in the
MDS-UPDRS (e.g., amplitude, speed, and their variability), we
first identified each movement repetition in the signal by distinguishing the peaks and valleys in the SSA signal. Then, we
defined the amplitude of a single movement as the difference in
amplitude from a peak to the next valley and the frequency of
each movement as the inverse of the time between consecutive
peaks (see Fig. 2). To represent amplitude and frequency (representing speed of movement) as mentioned in the MDS-UPDRS,
the mean amplitude and mean frequency across all identified
movements were calculated. Due to its smoothness, the SSA
signal more closely resembles the observed oscillation pattern
associated with the type of movements studied in the MDSUPDRS than the RA signal. On the other hand, the low-pass
filtering effect of the spline interpolation reduces the amplitude
of each individual movement repetition in the SSA signal. We,
therefore, decided to calculate features for both the RA and SSA
signals.
Other characteristics that are evaluated according to the MDSUPDRS are decrement of movement amplitude, and slowing of

MARTINEZ-MANZANERA et al.: METHOD FOR AUTOMATIC AND OBJECTIVE SCORING OF BRADYKINESIA USING ORIENTATION SENSORS

movement. To capture decrement of movement amplitude, the
slope of the straight line fitted through all movement amplitudes
as a function of movement repetition number was taken (slope
amplitude). To capture slowing of movement, a similar procedure was performed for the movement frequencies, resulting in
the feature slope frequency. These procedures were performed
for both the RA and SSA signals.
Rhythm is another characteristic mentioned in the MDSUPDRS and can be defined as any sequence of regularly recurring events. To account for this characteristic, we estimated
features based on its reciprocal, movement variability. We estimated amplitude and frequency variability by calculating the
standard deviations (std) of all individual movement amplitudes
and frequencies, respectively. This resulted in the features std
amplitude and std frequency.
Another characteristic mentioned in the MDS-UPDRS is regularity. The expected regular signal of a healthy subject describes a smooth pattern. To account for regularity, we obtained
features related to the smoothness of the signal. Compared to
their corresponding RA signals, SSA signals are much smoother.
The goodness of fit of SSA signals to their corresponding RA
signals thus provides an indication of the smoothness of movement. The discrepancy between these two signals is summarized
in the following additional features: sum of squares due to error
(SSE), which is the total deviation of the SSA signal from the
RA signal, the coefficient of determination (R2) and the root
mean squared error (RMSE) [27].
We additionally included features describing maximum velocity during movement initiation and termination. First, to estimate the velocity of each movement, the first derivative of
the SSA signal was calculated. According to Shima et al. [9],
we determined the maximum velocity during initiation of each
movement (extension for finger tapping, dorsiflexion for foot
tapping, and supination for diadochokinesis) and during termination of each movement (flexion for finger tapping, plantar
flexion for foot tapping, and pronation for diadochokinesis) and
used their mean and coefficient of variation (CV) resulting in
the features mean and CV maxV during movement initiation
and mean and CV maxV during movement termination.
Finally, hesitations were quantified according to Shima et al.
[9], employing zero crossings in the acceleration signal. The
acceleration signal was calculated as the second derivative of the
SSA signal. An individual movement was considered to contain
hesitations if its corresponding acceleration signal contained
more than two zero crossings. The percentage of individual
movements containing hesitations (percentage of hesitations)
and the CV of the number of zero crossings of each individual
movement (CV of zero crossings) were determined as features
related to hesitations.
F. Feature Selection
The features so far described constitute the basic set of features (set 1) that was used in the forward-selection wrapper to
select features for the classifier. Since the relationship between
the selected features and an evaluator’s scores might be better described by nonlinear than by linear relationships, we also

1019

TABLE I
FEATURES’ NUMBERS FOR SETS 1 AND 2
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

FEATURE

Squared Version Number

Slope amplitude RA
Mean amplitude RA
Standard deviation amplitude RA
Slope frequency RA
Mean frequency RA
Standard deviation frequency SSA
Slope amplitude SSA
Mean amplitude SSA
Standard deviation amplitude SSA
Slope frequency SSA
Mean frequency SSA
Standard deviation frequency SSA
Filtered signal fit (SSE)
Filtered signal fit (R2)
Filtered signal fit (RMSE)
Percentage of hesitations
CV of zero crossings
Mean maxV during movement initiation
CV maxV during movement initiation
Mean maxV during movement termination
CV maxV during movement termination

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

Set of features for subsets 1 and 2. Set 1 includes features 1 to 21. Set 2 is composed
from these features plus their squared version (features 22 to 42).

formed a set of features (set 2), which was composed of the
features of set 1 and their squared values. A summary of all
features is given in Table I.
Our goal is to select features such that the characteristics
described in the MDS-UPDRS are captured. Amplitude and
frequency (representing speed of movement) are two characteristics that can be more easily and more reliably estimated
from sensor recordings than the rest of the characteristics (variability, hesitations, halts, etc.). Since these two characteristics
are mentioned in the MDS-UPDRS, we decided to include the
features that represent them (mean amplitude and mean frequency) in the algorithm. The relevance of these two features
to improve the classification performance was evaluated using
a t-test to compare their values between patients and controls.
A t-test is a univariate feature importance method [28]. Univariate methods assume feature independence. This assumption
is not met by amplitude and frequency (higher amplitudes can
only be obtained at the cost of speed and vice versa). Therefore,
feature importance was tested on the product of amplitude and
frequency. The results of the t-test indicate that this feature is
significantly different between patients and controls. Therefore,
we decided to include the two features mean amplitude and
mean frequency of the SSA signal in the classifiers a priori,
before the first iteration of the feature selection algorithm.
Wrappers are multivariate methods that take into account
feature dependences. They potentially achieve better results
because they do not make simplifying assumptions regarding
feature independence. The forward-selection wrapper approach
is an iterative method that includes one feature into the classification algorithm with each iteration [19]. It allows to observe the performance of the classifier (in terms of number of
tasks correctly classified) as features are added to the classifier.
The inclusion of features with meaningless variance in terms of

1020

classification will only confound learning methods [18]. Thus,
instead of entering every feature into the classifier, a subset of
features must be used. There are different feature selection methods. The forward-selection wrapper approach [16] was selected
for this study, because it is easier to interpret the incorporation of
each feature into the model than in the backward-selection approach where relations between variables are taken into account.
To select features, wrappers use the same evaluation criterion as
employed by the classifier itself (in this case, the classification
error). To determine which feature should be added, in each
iteration, the performance of the classifier is evaluated with all
already included features plus each candidate feature individually. The method will select the feature that results in the largest
performance improvement. This method was used separately on
sets 1 and 2 resulting in a subset of features for each (subsets 1
and 2).
We also explored classification performance when features
are obtained by dimensionality reduction using PCA. PCA was
applied to set 2 only, as it contains more features than set 1. The
resulting principal components (PCs) represent the (combined)
features from expert knowledge in order of explained variance.
However, more explained variance does not necessarily imply
better classification performance. We built two classifiers on the
basis of the resulting PCs (set 3): subset 3 was built by adding
the PC to the classifier (with each iteration) that explained most
of the remaining variance. Finally, subset 4 was built using the
forward-selection wrapper approach on the PCs. For a fair comparison across methods, the first two PCs that explained most
variance were also included a priori before the first iteration of
the feature selection method (see Fig. 3 for an overview of the
four classification approaches).

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 3. Overview of four classification approaches. From each set of features,
a subset with optimal features is constructed. The first two sets are composed of
features from expert knowledge and the last two contain features obtained from
PCA. Subsets 1, 2, and 4 are built using the forward-selection wrapper as the
feature selection algorithm, while subset 3 includes in each iteration the PC that
explains most of the variance that has not already been included. Two features
are included in each subset a priori before the addition of more features.

G. Classification
All classification approaches employed the classification error as evaluation criterion. The classification error was defined
as the percentage of patients that were incorrectly classified (according to the evaluator’s classification) using LOOCV [29],
which was used instead of other less computationally expensive
algorithms in view of the relatively low number of participants
[30].
The automatic classification was done using SVMs. SVMs
employ kernels to map the data into a higher dimensional feature space where data can be separated by a hyperplane [31].
Originally, SVMs were designed for binary classification. In this
study, the performance on each task was scored between zero
and four according to the MDS-UPDRS criteria by each of the
four evaluators. From the several methods that extend SVMs
use to multiclass classification [32], a one-versus-all strategy,
which employs binary classifiers (e.g., score-zero class versus
the rest of the classes) was selected (illustrated in Fig. 4). In each
binary classifier, the features derived from every performance
but one (according to LOOCV) were used as training samples
to construct a hyperplane. The remaining performance is used
as a test sample. Its location in the feature space determines
the confidence value, which can be interpreted as the Euclidian

Fig. 4. Multiclass classification using SVM and the RBF kernel in a oneversus-all methodology using LOOCV with only two features. In this example,
tasks were evaluated from 0 to 3 (four classes). In a one-versus-all methodology,
every single class is evaluated against the rest of the classes (e.g., red dots
correspond to the amplitude and frequency of the tasks scored as zero and white
dots correspond to the amplitude and frequency of the remaining tasks in the
top left figure). The different decision surfaces created using the red and white
dots are illustrated with different colors. The confidence of a new sample (green
dot representing the task left out by LOOCV) to belong to a certain class is
represented by the color of the surface and by the scale on the right of each
figure. The new sample is then classified in the class that obtained the highest
confidence (score 0 in the example).

MARTINEZ-MANZANERA et al.: METHOD FOR AUTOMATIC AND OBJECTIVE SCORING OF BRADYKINESIA USING ORIENTATION SENSORS

1021

B. Classification

Fig. 5. Boxplots of combined amplitude–frequency feature for finger tapping
(left), diadochokinesis (center), and toe tapping (right). On average, for the
three tasks controls exhibit a significantly higher combination of amplitude and
frequency than patients.

distance of the sample to the separating hyperplane and it expresses the confidence of a sample to belong to a certain class.
The remaining sample is then classified in the class that obtained
the highest confidence value across all binary classifiers. When
using SVMs, the choice of the kernel determines the separation
boundaries of the classes. In this study, the radial basis function
(RBF) ( 2) kernel was used, which is generally a reasonable
choice [33].
KRBF = (x, x ) = exp(−γ x −x  ).
2

(2)

Here, x and x’ are two training samples of the feature space and
γ determines the influence of the squared Euclidian distance
(between the feature vectors x and x’) to build the hyperplane.
In this study, γ = 1.0 was selected. To avoid poor performance
due to relatively large values of individual features, all features
were first normalized using z-scores.
For all methods, the classification error obtained at each iteration of the feature selection wrapper was compared against the
average interrater scoring error. This error was defined as the
average percentage of tasks that were classified differently by
each combination of two evaluators.
III. RESULTS
A. Combined Amplitude–Frequency
The distributions for combined amplitude-frequency were all
normally distributed for the three MDS-UPDRS items and for
both groups with the exception of toe tapping for patients (p =
0.04, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test). T-tests were used for all group
comparisons including toe tapping, since its distribution did not
show large differences from normality. Combined amplitude–
frequency was always higher for controls than for patients (finger tapping: controls M = 131.85 deg/s, patients M = 107.73
deg/s, p = 0.0002; diadochokinesis: controls M = 170.68 deg/s,
patients M = 150.78 deg/s, p = 0.03; toe tapping: controls
M = 32.19 deg/s, patients M = 12.16 deg/s, p < 0.0001, see
Fig. 5).

The effects of the curse of dimensionality (the performance
does no longer increase (substantially) even though more features were added) are visible for each of the three items approximately after the sixth iteration (seven features used) (illustrated
in Fig. 6). Therefore, we focus our analysis on the results obtained before this effect occurs.
1) Finger Tapping: The average classification error for each
subset is illustrated for finger tapping in Fig. 6 (left). Classification employing features in subsets 1 and 2 gave better results
than employing features in subsets 3 and 4. When seven features
were included (sixth iteration), the classification error for subsets 1 and 2 was 33% and 31.5%, respectively: an improvement
of 15–16.5% compared to the average interrater scoring error
(48%). These performances were just 0.5–1% lower than the
best performance of the classifiers that occurred at the ninth and
tenth iterations, respectively. After four iterations the best performance for subset 3 was obtained, resulting in a classification
error of 53.5%: 5.5% worse than the average interrater scoring
error. After six iterations, the classification error of subset 4 was
41.5%: this performance is 6.5% better than the average interrater scoring error and 4.5% worse than the best performance
found at iteration eight.
Until iteration six, the unique features selected by more than
one classifier for subsets 1 or 2 (besides features 8 and 11 that
were included a priori) were the features 12, 1, and 22.
2) Diadochokinesis: The average classification error at each
iteration for each subset is illustrated for diadochokinesis in
Fig. 6 (center). Overall classification performed better for subsets 1 and 2 than for subsets 3 and 4. After six iterations, the
classification errors for subset 1 and 2 were 35.5% and 36%,
respectively: an improvement of 9.3–9.8% compared to the average interrater scoring error (45.3%). Classification for subset
3 shows very poor improvement performance. The best performance was obtained after iteration ten, resulting in a classification error of 44.5%: a minor improvement of 0.8% compared
to the average interrater scoring error. However, classification
for subset 4 shows a similar pattern as for subsets 1 and 2. At
the sixth iteration, a classification error of 40% is obtained: an
improvement of 5.3% compared to the average interrater scoring error and 9.8% worse than the best performance found at
iteration ten.
Until iteration six, the unique features selected by more than
one classifier for subsets 1 and 2 (besides features 8 and 11 that
were included a priori) were the features 1, 4, 5, 10, 16, 28, and
37.
3) Toe Tapping: The average classification error for each subset is illustrated for toe tapping in Fig. 6 (right). After six iterations, the classification error for subsets 1 and 2 was 37.5% and
35.5%, respectively: an improvement of 18.2–20.2% compared
to the average interrater scoring error (55.7%) and only 1.5–
2.5% worse than the best performance for these subsets. Classification for subset 3 showed very poor performance, obtaining
its lowest error at iteration two (52%): only 3.7% better than
the average interrater scoring error and not showing improvement afterwards. On the other hand, classification performance

1022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 6. Boxplots of combined amplitude–frequency feature for finger tapping (left), diadochokinesis (center), and toe tapping (right). Below each graph, there is
a visualization of the features selected for subsets 1 and 2 for each evaluator on each iteration. The incorporation of a nonrepeated feature is indicated in pale gray.
On dark gray, the features that are selected by more than one classifier are indicated.

for subset 4 showed a continuous improvement. After six iterations, it obtained a classification error of 35%: an improvement
of 17% compared to the average interrater scoring error and
5.5% worse than its best performance.
Until iteration six, the unique features selected by more than
one classifier for subsets 1 or 2 (besides features 8 and 11 that
were included a priori) were the features 2, 12, 21, and 33.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we showed how objective measurement and assessment of the bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS
can be achieved using a 9DoF sensor and SVM-based classification. Our approach resulted in a consistent scoring of tasks
with a lower classification error than the interrater classification error that occurs when bradykinesia is assessed by different
evaluators. Classification based on features that were closely
related to the important characteristics assessed in the MDSUPDRS outperformed classification based on features that resulted from dimensionality reduction (PCA) for two of the three
bradykinesia-related items. The importance of selecting appropriate and relevant features is most obvious from the results
obtained when, at each iteration, the PC that explained most
of the remaining variance in the dataset was added (subset 3);
this approach resulted in the worst classification performance
among all subsets.
As expected, for all items and before too many features
were entered in the algorithm, classification based on subset
2 obtained a slightly better classification more rapidly than for
subset 1. This suggests that the relation between the selected
features and the clinical evaluation might be nonlinear. Among
the many nonlinear transformations of features that could have
been used (e.g., logarithmic, square root, etc.), we only investigated the change in classification performance when quadratic
features were added to the set of features. It may be that including features derived from other nonlinear transformations
of the original features would further improve classification performance.
Amplitude and speed are the two characteristics mentioned
in the MDS-UPDRS that can be more directly related with

specific features from the recorded signal. After confirming their
relevance with a feature importance test, we decided to include
them a priori into the feature selection algorithm. A different
approach would be a feature selection algorithm without a priori
inclusion of features. However, depending on the scores used to
train the classifiers, some features that according to the MDSUPDRS should be included in the classifier might be left out. The
other extreme case would have been to include every feature,
which would most likely result in overfitting and problems due
to the curse of dimensionality.
A. Feature Selection
For most of the subsets, the best classification performance
was obtained around the sixth iteration. In most cases, further
inclusion of features did not improve or even declined classifier performance. Our discussion is, therefore, focused on the
features selected by the classifiers in subsets 1 and 2 until this
iteration. The features selected by the classifiers suggest which
features were more relevant for each evaluator.
1) Finger Tapping: From set 1, feature 1 (slope amplitude
RA) and feature 12 (std frequency RA) were the only features
selected by more than one classifier. This indicates that the
variability in movement speed (feature 12) and the decrease in
movement amplitude (feature 1) are important characteristics to
score this task. A decrease in movement amplitude is typical
for patients with PD. Probably both methods selected the slope
from the RA signal (feature 1) and not from the SSA signal
(feature 7) because the low-pass filter effect of the spline interpolation reduced signal amplitude. From set 2, feature 1 was also
selected by more than one classifier. Moreover, the only other
feature selected by more than one classifier was its squared version (feature 22). For subset 2, feature 12 was only selected
by one classifier. This probably occurred because one classifier
included the square of featured 12 (feature 33), instead.
2) Diadochokinesis: From set 1, five features were selected
by at least two classifiers for diadochokinesis. Features 1 (slope
amplitude RA), 4 (slope frequency RA), 5 (mean frequency RA),
10 (slope frequency SSA), and 15 (percentage of hesitations)
were selected. From set 2, only two features were selected by

MARTINEZ-MANZANERA et al.: METHOD FOR AUTOMATIC AND OBJECTIVE SCORING OF BRADYKINESIA USING ORIENTATION SENSORS

at least two classifiers: feature 15 was substituted by its squared
version (feature 37) and the squared version of slope amplitude
SSA signal (feature 28) was also included. The inclusion of slope
frequency and slope amplitude underlines the importance of the
decrease in amplitude and speed of movement to rate this task.
Since feature 11 (mean frequency SSA) was one of the a priori
selected features, it is interesting to notice that two classifiers
also included feature 5 (mean frequency RA). This suggests that
the information contained in these two features is different. The
percentage of hesitations was a feature selected from both sets
1 and 2 for diadochokinesis, while it was not selected for the
other two bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS. We
suggest that this may be explained by the fatigue induced by
this task, which may result in short movement halts that can be
identified on video.
3) Toe Tapping: From set 1, feature 2 (mean amplitude RA)
and feature 12 (std frequency SSA) were the only features selected by more than one classifier for toe tapping. For the classifiers that employed set 2, the std frequency of SSA signal was
substituted by its squared version (feature 33). In contrast to the
other two bradykinesia-related items of the MDS-UPDRS, feature 1 (slope amplitude RA) was not selected by more than one
classifier. This can be explained by the difficulty of evaluating
the small amplitude movements involved in toe tapping. Feature
21 (CV maxV during movement termination) was selected by
more than one classifier from set 1, but it was not selected anymore from set 2. This probably occurred because one classifier
included the square of featured 21 (feature 42).
In this study, we allowed the inclusion of repeated features in
the feature selection algorithm. The reasons are twofold. First,
the kernel employed by the SVM classifier (RBF) defines the
shape of the decision boundary. The decision boundary obtained
in a larger feature space (with more dimensions) might produce
a better classification even if the features included are repeated.
Also, limiting the inclusion of features to only nonrepeated
features might force the inclusion of nonrelevant features.

V. CONCLUSION
The objective evaluation based on features eliminates inconsistency within an evaluator. Using a classification algorithm
with objective features we were able to score the bradykinesiarelated items of the MDS-UPDRS task more accurately than
the average interrater scoring error. However, since classifiers
learned from labels obtained from evaluators individual bias is
still present in each classifier. Following the same methodology
with a larger number of evaluators and employing only the tasks
where consensus is found could lead to an unbiased objective
measuring system. This could lead to an improvement in the
assessment and monitoring of movement disorders.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Heldman et al., “The modified bradykinesia rating scale for Parkinson’s disease: Reliability and comparison with kinematic measures,” Mov.
Disord., vol. 26, pp. 1859–1863, 2011.

1023

[2] M. Pastorino et al., “Assessment of Bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease
patients through a multi-parametric system,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2011, Jan. 2011, pp. 1810–1813.
[3] N. L. Keijsers et al., “Online monitoring of dyskinesia in patients
with Parkinson’s disease,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 96–103, May/Jun. 2003.
[4] C. G. Goetz et al., “Movement disorder society-sponsored revision of
the unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale (MDS-UPDRS): Scale presentation and clinimetric testing results,” Mov. Disord., vol. 23, no. 15,
pp. 2129–2170, Nov. 2008.
[5] P. J. G. Ruiz et al., “Bradykinesia in Huntington’s disease,” Clin. Neuropharmacol., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 50–52, Jan. 2000.
[6] J. Cancela et al., “A comprehensive motor symptom monitoring and
management system: The bradykinesia case,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. Conf., Jan. 2010, pp. 1008–1011.
[7] J.-W. Kim et al., “Quantification of bradykinesia during clinical finger
taps using a gyrosensor in patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 365–371, Mar. 2011.
[8] A. Salarian and H. Russmann, “Quantification of tremor and bradykinesia
in Parkinson’s disease using a novel ambulatory monitoring system,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 313–322, Feb. 2007.
[9] K. Shima et al., “Measurement and evaluation of finger tapping movements using magnetic sensors,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
vol. 2008, Jan. 2008, pp. 5628–5631.
[10] A. L. Taylor Tavares et al., “Quantitative measurements of alternating
finger tapping in Parkinson’s disease correlate with UPDRS motor disability and reveal the improvement in fine motor control from medication
and deep brain stimulation,” Mov. Disord., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1286–1298,
Oct. 2005.
[11] D. G. M. Zwartjes et al., “Ambulatory monitoring of activities and motor
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57,
no. 11, pp. 2778–2786, Nov. 2010.
[12] A. Kishore et al., Unilateral versus bilateral tasks in early asymmetric
Parkinson’s disease: Differential effects on bradykinesia,” Mov. Disord.,
vol. 22, pp. 328–333, 2007.
[13] A. J. Espay et al., Differential response of speed, amplitude, and rhythm
to dopaminergic medications in Parkinson’s disease,” Mov. Disord.,
vol. 26, pp. 2504–2508, 2011.
[14] A. J. Espay et al., Impairments of speed and amplitude of movement in
Parkinson’s disease: A pilot study,” Mov. Disord., vol. 24, pp. 1001–1008,
2009.
[15] G. Pal and C. G. Goetz, “Assessing bradykinesia in Parkinsonian disorders,” Front. Neurol., vol. 4, pp. 1–5, Jan. 2013.
[16] O. Martinez-Manzanera et al., “A method for automatic, objective and
continuous scoring of bradykinesia,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf.
Body Sensor Networks, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015.
[17] Shimmer, Dublin, Ireland. (2014). [Online]. Available: shimmersensing.com
[18] P. F. Evangelista et al., “Taming the curse of dimensionality in kernels
and novelty detection,” Adv. Soft Comput., vol. 34, pp. 425–438, 2006.
[19] R. Kohavi and H. John, “Wrappers for feature subset selection,” Artif.
Intell., vol. 97, no. 97, pp. 273–324, 2011.
[20] G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, vol. 103. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2013.
[21] S. Madgwick et al., “Estimation of IMU and MARG orientation using
a gradient descent algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot.,
2011, pp. 1–7.
[22] Y. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for health
informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1538–1554,
May 2014.
[23] Shimmer. (2015). Shimmer LabVIEW development library V0.1".
[Online] Available at http://www.shimmersensing.com/support/wirelesssensor-networks-download/
[24] C. V Bouten et al., “A triaxial accelerometer and portable data processing
unit for the assessment of daily physical activity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 136–47, Mar. 1997.
[25] The MathWorks, (2014). Smoothing Splines. [Online]. Available:
mathworks.com/help/curvefit/smoothing-splines.html
[26] C. Shalizi. (2011). Splines: Smoothing by directly penalizing
curve flexibility. [Online]. Available: http: www.stat.cmu.edu/∼cshalizi/
402/lectures/11-splines/lecture-11.pdf., Accessed: 3-Dec-2014.
[27] The MathWorks. (2015). Evaluating Goodness of Fit. [Online]. Available:
nl.mathworks.com/help/curvefit/evaluating-goodness-of-fit.html#bq_
5kwr-3, Accessed: 3-Dec-2014.

1024

[28] I. Guyon et al., Feature Extraction, vol. 207. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2006.
[29] P. A. Lachenbruch and M. R. Mickey, “Estimation of error rates in discriminant analysis,” Technometrics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Feb. 1968.
[30] G. C. Cawley and N. L. C. Talbot, “Preventing over-fitting during model
selection via Bayesian regularisation of the hyper-parameters,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 8, 841–861, 2007.
[31] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn.,
vol. 7, pp. 144–152, 1995.
[32] C.-W. Hsu and C.-J. Lin, “A comparison of methods for multiclass support
vector machines,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 415–425,
Jan. 2002.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

[33] C. Hsu, C. Chang, and C. Lin. (2010). A practical guide to support vector classification. [Online]. Available: http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/
papers/guide/guide.pdf. [Accessed: 10-Apr-2014]

Authors’ photographs and biographies are not available at the time of
publication.

