188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Development and Validation of a High-Fidelity
Finite-Element Model of Monopolar Stimulation
in the Implanted Guinea Pig Cochlea
Paul Wong, Shefin George, Phillip Tran, Andrian Sue, Paul Carter, and Qing Li∗

Abstract—Goal: To validate a new electroanatomical model of
the implanted guinea pig cochlea against independently obtained
in vivo voltage tomography data, and evaluate the validity of existing modeling assumptions on current paths and neural excitation. Methods: An in silico model was generated from sTSLIM
images and analyzed in COMSOL Multiphysics. Tissue resistivities and boundary conditions were varied to test model sensitivity.
Results: The simulation was most sensitive to the resistivities of
bone, perilymph, and nerve. Bone tissue in particular should be
separated by morphology because different types of bone have
different electrical properties. Despite having a strong impact on
intrascalar voltages and exit pathways, most boundary conditions,
including a new alternative proposed to account for the unmodeled
return path, only had a weak effect on neural excitation. Conclusion: The new model demonstrated a strong correlation with the
in vivo voltage data. Significance: These findings address a longstanding knowledge gap about appropriate boundary conditions,
and will help to promote wider acceptance of insights from computational models of the cochlea.
Index Terms—Boundary conditions, cochlear implants (CI),
electrical stimulation, finite-element (FE) analysis, image
segmentation.

I. INTRODUCTION
N biomedical engineering, computational models are often
less able to accurately predict outcomes than in other fields
of engineering because the complex nature of biophysical interactions makes them more difficult to represent mathematically.
Nevertheless, when used in conjunction with in vivo studies and
bench-top testing, in silico studies have proven invaluable for
obtaining a holistic understanding of medical devices since they
enable experiments that would be impossible to perform using
other methods [1], [2].
Cochlear implant (CI) design is one area of research where
in silico models are particularly useful. Despite advances in

I

Manuscript received December 18, 2014; revised August 13, 2015 and
September 9, 2015; accepted September 12, 2015. Date of publication September 12, 2015; date of current version December 17, 2015. This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Linkage Scheme (LP0776938). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
P. Wong, P. Tran, and A. Sue are with the School of Aerospace, Mechanical
and Mechatronic Engineering, The University of Sydney.
S. George is with the Bionics Institute.
P. Carter is with Implants Development, Cochlear Limited.
∗ Q. Li is with the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2006, Australia (e-mail:
qing.li@sydney.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2480601

speech processing techniques [3], sentence recognition scores
have plateaued for almost two decades, suggesting that there is a
bottleneck at the electrode–tissue interface [4]. As such, the key
to improving future performance is a greater spatial understanding of how current injection affects the auditory neurons [2].
In vivo methods are not ideal for this because the human inner
ear is intricate and difficult to access surgically. Many studies
have been performed on animals like the guinea pig, whose
cochlea is easily exposed in the tympanic bulla [5], but still the
invasive nature of experimental probing cannot reveal detailed
current pathways. In silico investigations in the form of volume
conduction models (VCMs) approach the problem from a different perspective and can overcome some of these challenges.
Existing VCMs of both human and guinea pig cochleae [2],
[6]–[16] have yielded many useful insights, but there is a reluctance to trust their findings in the research community. This is
probably due to a range of factors, including the crude geometry of some existing models, unfamiliarity with computational
methods, insufficient justification of assumptions, and the limited ability of models to predict psychophysical outcomes with
consistent accuracy.
The primary goal of this paper is to introduce a new finite
element (FE) model of the implanted guinea pig cochlea, and to
compare its in silico predictions against similar in vivo voltage
tomography data obtained independently at the Bionics Institute
in Melbourne, Australia. If a good correlation between the in
silico and in vivo results is found, confidence in the new FE
model will be established, and some of the concerns surrounding
the use of VCMs may be alleviated.
The correlation is expected to be strong because the new
model includes several improvements over previous models.
Existing VCMs typically use histological sections traced and
swept along a spiral path, or a simplified computer-aided design
(CAD) geometry. This model was reconstructed from a stack
of scanning thin-sheet laser imaging microscopy (sTSLIM)
images [17], so the geometry is considerably more realistic: the
hook region is accurately represented and includes the round
window membrane and the stapes; the scala tympani and scala
vestibuli are truly continuous at the helicotrema; the major blood
vessels and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the modiolus were
incorporated—unique for VCMs of the cochlea. Furthermore,
bone was not treated as a homogeneous material, but instead
separated into the modiolar bone, the otic capsule, and the temporal bone. These have markedly different microstructures, and
hence, different electrical resistivities, so they should be treated
as separate material domains [4], [15], [18].

0018-9294 © 2015 British Crown Copyright

WONG et al.: DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF A HIGH-FIDELITY FINITE-ELEMENT MODEL OF MONOPOLAR STIMULATION

189

TABLE I
SEGMENTED TISSUE TYPES AND BASE RESISTIVITY VALUES
Material
(Included Structures)
Bone
Modiolar bone
Otic capsule
Temporal bone
Perilymph
(scala tympani, scala vestibuli)
Endolymph
(scala media, vestibule)
Nerve
(cochlear nerve trunk, spiralganglion,
peripheral processes)
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Blood
(spiral modiolar artery, vein of the
scala tympani)
Spiral ligament
Stria vascularis
Organ of corti
Basilar membrane
Reissner’s membrane
Round window membrane
Silicone
Platinum
a
b

Base Resistivity
(Ω.m)

Source

11.7
6.41
13.73a
0.7

Suesserman [20]
Suesserman [20]
Suesserman [20]
Finley [5]

0.6

Finley [5]

3

Finley [5]

0.56
1.5

Gabriel [21]
Mohapatra [22]

0.6
188.685
83.333
80
10,204
1,000b
1 × 107
1.06 × 10−7

Frijns [7]
Frijns [7]
Frijns [7]
Finley [5]
Finley [5]
—

Based on Suesserman’s measurement for the guinea pig skull.
No data available; estimate based on values of other membranous tissues.

Fig. 1. Midmodiolar slice from (a) the original sTSLIM image stack, and (b)
the corresponding segmentation.

II. METHOD: In Silico MODELING
A modular workflow based on that established by Tran et al.
[16] was adopted in order to overcome the segmentation and
meshing challenges typically encountered in electroanatomical modeling [24]. The best features of several programs were
selectively combined to create a more accurate model than
would otherwise have been possible.
A. Imaging and Reconstruction

The secondary goal of this paper is to evaluate the validity
of long-held assumptions on material properties and boundary
conditions. These two factors are important in determining the
in silico results for any particular geometry.
Like previous studies, this model assumes that the cochlear
tissues are purely resistive, based on the evidence provided by
Spelman [19]. Resistivity values from the literature (see Table I)
are used as base values. There are no measurements in the literature for the round window membrane, which is being incorporated into a VCM for the first time. To determine the impact of
any measurement uncertainties, as well as natural variations in
properties between individuals, the sensitivity of the model to
each tissue resistivity value was evaluated.
Boundary conditions are modeling constraints necessary for
solving the field problem [23] and should ideally replicate the
physics at the boundary of the modeled domain accurately.
This is problematic for VCMs of the cochlea simulating monopolar (MP) stimulation because the return electrode lies outside
the physical domain of the model. Existing models deal with
this issue by assuming that the end of the auditory nerve is
grounded [2], [12], that the ground is infinitely far away [8], or
that boundary box surfaces are grounded [10], [14]—none of
these perfectly match the in vivo situation. Alternatively, they
avoid the MP situation altogether and focus on pseudomonopolar or bipolar stimulation [6], [7], [9], [11]. Although the simulation results in these cases are indicative, they are less clinically
relevant given the widespread use of MP stimulation in CI recipients. To clarify how the boundary condition assumption affects
simulation results, several different cases, reflecting the range of
existing choices as well as more realistic alternatives, are compared to provide some guidance for future modeling efforts.

A high-resolution (4.625 × 4.625 × 5 μm voxel size) sTSLIM
image stack of the guinea pig cochlea was obtained from The
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA [see Fig. 1(a)].
This technique combines the high resolution and clarity of optical microscopy with the nondestructive nature of computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), making it ideal for capturing fine anatomical details [17], [25]. The
cochlea was explanted from a healthy guinea pig, with no visible
scar tissue and only minor neuronal degeneration at the basal
end. Both soft and hard tissues were identifiable, and the images
were predominantly free of absorption artifacts.
Fourteen different tissue types were then identified and segmented [see Table I and Fig. 1(b)] using a semimanual process in
Amira v5.4.2 (Visualization Sciences Group, Burlington, MA,
USA). For each tissue, a region in one image was selected
with the aid of luminance thresholds. The selection was then
smoothed, and the process repeated on the adjacent slice. If
there was minimal variation in shape between successive slices,
the next selection would be made several slices away and the
volume in between was selected via interpolation. This preserved the organic appearance of the tissues while reducing the
amount of data to be processed. Perilymph, endolymph, nerve,
and blood were subcategorized by anatomical structure to aid
visualization. The thin membranes between the scala vestibuli
and the vestibule were excluded in this reconstruction, as per
other models. Finally, some additional smoothing was applied,
and any remaining voxel fragments were allocated to adjacent
masks to ensure continuity throughout the volume in preparation
for mesh generation.
The segmented domains were exported into ScanIP v4.3
(Simpleware Limited, Exeter, U.K.), and a surface model was

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Reconstruction of the healthy guinea pig cochlea. The complex internal structures are clearly seen on the right. Note that the CSF and modiolar bone
encase the nerve tissue as per Fig. 1(b), but these are shown with transparency here to reveal the major blood vessels.

generated from the binarized masks in a stereolithography (STL)
format. The presmoothing and part change options were enabled
to avoid jagged surfaces, and decimation was disabled to ensure
conformity between adjacent components. The resulting reconstruction is shown in Fig. 2.
B. Mesh Generation
The STL files were imported into ICEM CFD v15.0 (ANSYS Incorporated, Canonsburg, PA, USA) for volume meshing.
Since orthogonal surfaces artificially draw current toward the
center of each face [26], the tissues were embedded in a sphere
to facilitate the application of more realistic boundary conditions. Unlike the human cochlea, which is encased within the
temporal bone, the guinea pig cochlea protrudes into the tympanic bulla [5], so injected current must flow medially toward
the temporal bone. The surrounding sphere was, therefore, angled such that one hemisphere extended into the tympanic bulla
and the other into the surrounding temporal bone [hereafter referred to as the “temporal bone surface”; see inset, Fig. 9(c)],
matching the bone boundary in the scans.
A CAD model resembling the Cochlear Limited Hybrid-L8
(HL8) electrode array was inserted through the round window
and into the scala tympani in a midscala position. Electrodes
were numbered from E1 at the basal end to E8 at the apical
end. Insertion depth was just over 6 mm, corresponding to an
insertion angle of about 380° at E8. A “build topology” operation
was performed to ensure that the mesh respected the smooth
curves of the array model.
Element sizes for each component were established to balance
node count against geometrical accuracy. A volume mesh was
then generated using ICEM CFD’s top-down Octree algorithm.
Finally, any small element islands resulting from the process
were assigned to an adjacent domain.
C. FE Analysis
A base case was first defined as a reference for comparison
of the in silico results. All tissue domains were configured with

isotropic resistivities as in Table I. A 1 mA constant current
source was placed at the inner surface of the stimulating electrode, identical to that used for the in vivo measurements. The
external surface of the round window membrane was insulated
to prohibit current flow from the scala tympani into the nonconductive middle ear air space, as expected in vivo. Finally, the
temporal bone surface was grounded to represent the expected
MP current sink.
A convergence test was then performed to ensure sufficient
discretization. Five meshes were generated using different element size limits and imported into COMSOL Multiphysics v4.3
(COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden) in the NASTRAN format.
Both the PARDISO (direct) and Conjugate Gradient (iterative)
solvers were tested, with no observed difference in numerical
results. PARDISO just exceeded the computer’s RAM capacity
when solving quadratically discretized meshes, so the Conjugate Gradient solver was used to prevent writing to disk. Simulations were run on a Windows 7 workstation with an Intel Core
i7 3930K CPU and 64 GB of RAM.
Using the converged mesh, both material properties and
boundary conditions were altered ceteris paribus from the
base case. For the sensitivity analysis on material properties, individual tissue resistivities were set to either double
or half of the base value (Rattay [10] and Finley [27]), or
the highest or lowest values from literature, whichever deviated more from the base value. Since there was no data for
the round window membrane, its resistivity was assumed to be
1000 Ω.m based on the geometric average of Reissner’s membrane and the basilar membrane (see Table I), and an order of
magnitude variation was tested to account for the additional
uncertainty.
For the boundary condition tests, the base case was rerun with
each of the following boundary conditions (shown as insets in
Fig. 9):
1) ground the auditory nerve trunk only;
2) ground the caudal aspect of the temporal bone surface;
3) ground the entire temporal bone surface;
4) apply a voltage offset on the temporal bone surface;

WONG et al.: DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF A HIGH-FIDELITY FINITE-ELEMENT MODEL OF MONOPOLAR STIMULATION

191

Fig. 3. Modeled domain only includes the resistance inside the cochlea. For
MP stimulation, injected current must also overcome the resistance of the head
to reach ground, so the voltage at the boundary should be nonzero.

5) ground the entire outer surface of the surrounding sphere;
6) ground at an infinitely large surrounding sphere.
Boundary conditions 2–5 were applied on a surrounding
sphere of radius 5 mm because this size was found to be sufficiently large for replicating far-field effects [26]. For grounding
at infinity, a second shell of radius 8 mm was added and configured as an infinite element domain in COMSOL, with resistivity
set to that of the guinea pig skull [20].
The voltage offset boundary condition is a novel proposal. In
a real CI recipient, the stimulating current must pass through
the cochlear tissues as well as the rest of the head in order to
reach the return electrode under MP stimulation (see Fig. 3).
If the resistance of the head is not accounted for in the model,
the total resistance will be underestimated. The circuit is also a
voltage divider, so given the nonzero resistance of the head, the
electric potential at the model boundary should also be nonzero
(i.e., not grounded). The offset value for these simulations was
determined as the average difference in terminal voltages between grounding at the temporal bone surface and the mean in
vivo profile.
The primary model output was the average voltage at each
electrode, because this could be directly compared with the
in vivo results. The magnitude and direction of current flow
were depicted using streamline plots of current density seeded
on a regular quadratic grid over the surface of the active electrode. Neuron trajectories covering the first 570° of the cochlea
were modeled in MATLAB (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA,
USA) by connecting key points from the tips of the peripheral
processes, through the cross-sectional center of the spiral ganglion, and down along the cochlear nerve trunk [see Fig. 4(a)],
similar to Kalkman et al. [28]. For each neuron, nodes of Ranvier were placed at fixed intervals from the point in Rosenthal’s
canal. Spacing resembled that used in the GSEF neural model
[7]: 175 μm along the peripheral process and 300 μm along
the axon. The activating function (AF), i.e., the discrete second
derivative of electric potential with respect to distance along
the fiber [29], was computed for each set of adjacent nodal triads along 100 equally spaced fibers. This signifies the degree
to which the underlying electrophysiological requirements for
neural firing are met.
III. METHOD: In Vivo MEASUREMENTS
Voltage tomography measurements were collected from eight
(N = 8) adult pigmented guinea pigs (500–800 g) for comparison with the in silico results. All procedures were approved by
the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital Animal Research and

Fig. 4. (a) 3-D representation of the base case neural sheet; fibers 1 and 100
are traced in green. (b) Corresponding 2-D plot. The coordinate system follows
that of Kalkman et al., but here Rosenthal’s canal is always at node 0. The
location of the active electrode is marked by the box near fiber 35. A secondary
region of excitation is predicted one full turn away, near fiber 90.

Ethics Committee and were in accordance with the Australian
Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes. All procedures were performed in an electrically
isolated Faraday room.
The animals were anaesthetized using isoflurane (1.5–2%)
and oxygen (1 L/min). Each subject’s respiration rate (normal
levels: 15–25 breaths/min) and end-tidal CO2 levels (normal
levels: 1–3%) were monitored over the duration of the experiment (2–3 h). Core body temperature was maintained at
37.0 ± 1°C. A postauricular incision was made and the left
cochlea was surgically exposed. Each animal was implanted
with an HL8 array, containing eight intracochlear platinum halfband electrodes on a silicone carrier. The electrode array was
inserted approximately 6 mm through the round window into the
scala tympani, typically placing 7–8 electrodes within the scala.
A platinum ball electrode placed in the neck muscles served as
the MP return and reference electrode.
For each intracochlear electrode, a monopolar cathodic-first
biphasic pulse (25 μs per phase and 8 μs interphase gap) was
delivered with an amplitude of 1 mA. The voltage at each of the
nonstimulating electrodes was measured with respect to the reference electrode at the end of the cathodic phase. The voltage at
the stimulating electrode was estimated as the maximum among
the values extrapolated from all available adjacent pairs, as
adapted from van den Honert and Kelsall [30], to ensure that the
sharpness of the current spread function was not underestimated.
IV. RESULTS
A. In vivo data
The raw measurements for all eight guinea pigs during stimulation at E4 are shown in Fig. 5. (Only results at E4 are presented
for brevity.) Differences between guinea pigs were observed,
presumably due to the unique geometry of each cochlea and its
surrounding tissues, variations in the surgical insertion of the implants and the resistivity of the tissues, and other subject-specific
factors. Most of the profiles clustered around the average, so a
mean profile was calculated to serve as a benchmark for comparison with the in silico results. The minimum to maximum

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE II
SENSITIVITY OF TERMINAL VOLTAGES TO TISSUE RESISTIVITIES
Tissue

Fig. 5. In vivo voltage measurements (N = 8) along the array during stimulation at E4. Shortened traces are due to tip fold-over or incomplete insertion.
The shaded area represents the spread of in vivo results.

Bone (homogeneous, ρ = 6.41 Ω.m)
Modiolar bonea
Otic capsuleb (ρ = 1.5 − 350 Ω.m)
Temporal bonea
Perilympha
Endolympha
Nerveb (ρ = 1 − 7.14 Ω.m)
CSFa
Bloodb (ρ = 0.61 − 5.56 Ω.m)
Spiral ligamentb (ρ U = 2.5 Ω.m)
Stria vascularisb (ρ L = 3 Ω.m)
Organ of cortia
Basilar membranea
Reissner’s membranea
Round window membranec

Deviation from Base Case (%)
Mean

Max

43.2
1.76
50.7
73.9
10.3
0.51
3.18
0.83
0.18
2.03
0.28
0.08
0.03
0.02
0.02

51.0
3.60
59.0
90.8
47.2
0.65
5.79
1.06
0.61
2.99
0.42
0.14
0.06
0.04
0.05

a

Resistivity changed from base value by a factor of two.
Upper (ρ U ) and lower (ρ L ) resistivity limits based on extreme values from the literature,
as indicated.
c
Resistivity changed from base value by a factor of ten.
b

Fig. 6. Mesh convergence results for voltage at E3 during stimulation at E4.
The selected mesh (circled) exhibits only 0.3% difference relative to the densest
quadratic mesh (far right), and is considered converged.

voltage range over all specimens was also found and is shaded
in Fig. 5.
The apical electrode (E8) was excluded from the comparisons
because measurements from that electrode could not be obtained
in four of the eight guinea pigs. This was likely due to the
electrode tip folding over during insertion.
B. Mesh Convergence
Each mesh was solved using both linear and quadratic elements. The coarsest linear mesh had 262 620 degrees of freedom
(DOFs) and the finest quadratic mesh had 16 278 789 DOFs,
taking 12 s and 2 h, respectively, to compute.
Fig. 6 indicates that the mesh with 6 092 537 DOFs is well
converged, with only 0.3% difference relative to the densest
quadratic mesh that was tested. Solution time was about 30 min,
striking a good balance between accuracy and computational
cost. All of the linearly discretized meshes exhibited greater
than 5% difference, suggesting that linear shape functions were
insufficient for capturing the electric field behavior in this model
(cf., Frijns [7]).
C. Sensitivity of Terminal Voltage Predictions
Table II shows the percentage impact of tissue properties on
terminal voltage predictions. These values were calculated rela-

tive to the base case and classified as either negligible (less than
0.5% difference), weak (0.5–5%), or strong (more than 5%). For
this model, the resistivities of most tissues had either a negligible
or weak effect on terminal voltages. The exceptions were bone,
perilymph, and nerve. Temporal bone resistivity was the most
sensitive, with differences of up to 90.8% relative to the base
case. At extreme literature values for otic capsule resistivity [31],
[32], up to 59% difference was observed. Treating bone with a
homogeneous resistivity of 6.41 Ω.m underestimated terminal
voltages relative to the base case [see Fig. 7(a)]. Perilymph had
a particularly strong effect at the stimulating electrode and was
notably the only tissue to change the shape of the profile. Nerve
resistivity had up to 5.79% impact on terminal voltages.
Fig. 7(b) compares the in silico and in vivo terminal voltages
for each of the tested boundary conditions. Again, the shape of
the profile did not change significantly. A wide spread of voltage magnitudes was observed, however. Grounding at infinity
or at the nerve trunk overestimated voltages along the array,
relative to the observed in vivo mean. In contrast, grounding the
surrounding sphere or part thereof led to substantial underestimates, with smaller grounding areas corresponding to higher
terminal voltages. Some of these fell outside the range of observed in vivo measurements. Offset values required to match
the in vivo average were found to vary with the location of
current injection, as shown in Fig. 8. For stimulation at E4, a
0.905 V offset on the temporal bone surface yielded a close
match to the in vivo measurements.
D. Effect on Current Pathways
Streamline plots revealed that current spread in the near-field
was relatively insensitive to both tissue properties and boundary conditions, leading to similar gradients of voltage falloff
as shown in Fig 7. Beyond the scala tympani, however, current
flow patterns were noticeably different. Fig. 9 shows that current

WONG et al.: DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF A HIGH-FIDELITY FINITE-ELEMENT MODEL OF MONOPOLAR STIMULATION

193

Fig. 7. Sensitivity of terminal voltages to (a) selected resistivity values, and (b) boundary conditions. Base case values are marked with blue crosses. The light
gray areas represent the range of in vivo voltage measurements from Fig. 5(a). Most tissues had little impact on the in silico predictions, and almost all data points
fell outside the in vivo range. (b) Boundary conditions had virtually no effect on the shape of the profile, but strongly affected the voltage magnitudes.

Fig. 8. Voltage offset required to match the mean in vivo results changed with
the location of current injection. Offset values were lower for basal electrodes,
and leveled off between E4 and E7.

paths were strongly dependent on the prescribed boundary condition. Grounding the nerve [see Fig. 9(a)] was the most distinct,
with streamlines reconverging at the grounded nerve surface and
an obvious edge effect around its periphery. Grounding the entire
surrounding sphere [see Fig. 9(d)] resulted in omnidirectional
current spread beyond the cochlea, as did grounding at infinity
[see Fig 9(e)]. Restricting the grounding surface to a quadrant
[see Fig. 9(b)] or hemisphere [see Fig 9(c)] imposed a sense of
directionality on the exit pathway. Finally, applying a voltage
offset on the temporal bone surface [see Fig. 9(c)] produced
virtually identical streamlines as grounding it.
E. Estimated Impact on Neural Excitation
Differences in current flow pathways in turn affected predictions of neural excitation as measured by the AF. The main
regions of excitation were largely similar for any particular
stimulating electrode, but localized differences were also observed. Percentage differences in AF relative to the base case
[see Fig. 4(b)] are shown in Figs. 10 and 11. These plots show
the change in AF at each node of Ranvier along the unrolled
neural sheet when a single simulation parameter is varied. An
orientation guide is provided in Fig. 4.

Fig. 10(a)–(c) shows that higher bone resistivity drove more
current into the nerve tissue and increased depolarization relative
to the base case, and vice versa. Likewise, higher resistivities for
perilymph, nerve, or the spiral ligament led to increased axonal
activity [see Fig. 10(d)–(f)]. The differences were not uniform
and tended to be more pronounced near the main area of excitation (especially at the peripheral process) as well as at fibers one
full turn away (around fiber 90). For the boundary conditions,
grounding the nerve trunk [see Fig. 11(a)] resulted in significantly more widespread depolarization than in the other cases
(+67.5% RMS, the largest discrepancy of all the test cases).
The differences were largest near the end of the axon where
the ground was imposed. Grounding the caudal temporal bone
[see Fig. 11(b)] reflected the directionality of the corresponding
streamlines. AF values for the grounded temporal bone surface
and the corresponding offset case were virtually identical, which
was expected given their similar current pathways. A slightly
larger discrepancy was observed between the sphere grounding
and infinite grounding conditions [see Fig. 11(c)–(d)]. Nonetheless, boundary conditions 2–6 all produced AF patterns that were
within about 5% of each other, so the model was not sensitive
to this assumption.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Modeling Workflow
The methodology used in this study allowed for a high-fidelity
reconstruction of the cochlea with an unprecedented amount of
anatomical detail, but it also suffered from a few drawbacks
stemming from the large size of the data set. First, the time
required to process the image stack was in the order of months
due to the large number of tissues and the need for some sophisticated manual segmentation. Second, the segmentation process required comprehensive knowledge of the anatomy in the
region of interest, and consultations with anatomical experts
were needed to minimize the risk of incorrect reconstruction.
Algorithmic segmentation could be employed in the future to
reduce the time requirements and inconsistencies due to human
error, but to the extent of the authors’ knowledge, existing techniques are not well suited to datasets with many tissues and are

194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 9. Streamline plots showing the current paths during stimulation at E4 for (a) grounding the nerve trunk, (b) grounding the caudal aspect of the temporal
bone surface, (c) grounding or applying a 0.905-V offset on the temporal bone surface, (d) grounding the entire surrounding sphere, and (e) grounding at infinity.
Insets show the corresponding surfaces highlighted in red. The outermost domain in (e) is configured as an infinite element domain. Scale indicates current density
in the nerve tissue.

Fig. 10. Percentage difference in activating function relative to the base case resistivities [cf., Fig. 4(b)]. Consistently hyperpolarized regions were considered
unchanged. Selected tissue resistivity cases are shown: (a) homogenous bone (ρ = 6.41 Ω.m), (b) otic capsule (ρ = 350 Ω.m), (c) temporal bone (ρ = 6.865
Ω.m), (d) perilymph (ρ = 1.4 Ω.m), (e) nerve (ρ = 7.14 Ω.m), and (f) spiral ligament (ρ = 2.5 Ω.m). RMS differences are shown in the top-right corner.

WONG et al.: DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF A HIGH-FIDELITY FINITE-ELEMENT MODEL OF MONOPOLAR STIMULATION

195

Fig. 11. Percentage difference in activating function relative to grounding at the temporal bone surface [cf., Fig. 4(b)]. The boundary conditions shown here are
grounding at (a) cochlear nerve, (b) caudal aspect of the temporal bone surface, (c) surrounding sphere, and (d) at infinity.

usually optimized for CT or MRI image stacks. Third, although
the Octree algorithm was robust enough to handle the complexity of the surfaces, it always resulted in the production of
some small element islands. While smoothing the segmentation
eliminated some of these islands, the requirement for manual
intervention limits the potential for a fully automated process.
Overall, the capabilities of this workflow far outweighed its
limitations. It can be expected to translate well to other datasets
and other organs, regardless of imaging modality.
B. Material Properties
There is some concern that the base resistivity values for
cochlear-specific tissues may not be appropriate because the
scaling and disregard of spatial effects necessary to derive them
from bulk resistances compromises their accuracy [2], [4], [7].
Most values can also be traced back to a single source [33], so
there is doubt over the reliability of the measurements.
According to the simulation results, the model is not very sensitive to most tissue resistivities. The spread of terminal voltage
predictions in Fig. 7(a) is smaller than the standard deviation
of the in vivo measurements, suggesting that any uncertainties
were within intersubject variability limits. The continued use of
these values in the literature also suggests that they represent
the electric behavior reasonably well.
For the tissues to which the model was sensitive, some
(namely CSF, endolymph, and perilymph) have resistivities that
are known accurately [7], [21] and can, therefore, be used with
confidence. The FE model in this study was based on a healthy,
unimplanted guinea pig cochlea, and the validation data were
obtained from acute experiments, so the base value of perilymph
resistivity was suitable. In chronic implants, however, the perilymph around the electrode array is displaced by a layer of
fibrous encapsulation tissue [34]. Given the sensitivity of the
model to perilymph resistivity, this would have a bearing on
predictions of stimulation thresholds [35].
Terminal voltages were most sensitive to the bone domains
because injected current must pass through them to reach
ground. As such, these values were particularly crucial. The
Suesserman resistivity measurements [20] used in this study are
specific to the guinea pig and, given the care with which they
were taken, should be quite accurate. However, it is curious
that the lateral wall was reported as being less resistive than

the modiolar wall because higher density bone is more resistive
[32] and the otic capsule is the densest bone in the body [36].
The use of the skull value for the temporal bone and infinite domains may also be an underestimate since the temporal bone is
relatively dense. Conversely, the current path through the head
is likely to follow lower resistance pathways, such as through
the CSF [16]. Determining the true effect on the return pathway
would require a whole head model.
The resistivity of the spiral ligament should also be verified.
At 0.6 Ω.m, it is relatively low, reflecting the suspicion that
perilymph can diffuse freely through it and that it is involved
in ion transport [37]. However, considering the known presence
of various cell types and extracellular matrix material in the
tissue, and that perilymph itself has a resistivity of 0.7 Ω.m, this
may be inaccurate. The only other estimate in the literature is
2.5 Ω.m [2]. At this higher resistivity, the scala media became
more insulated, leading to differences in terminal voltages, current pathways, and AF. It may be worth investigating whether
the scala media should be modeled as being insulated on all
sides to represent the tight junctions between the surrounding
epithelial cells that prevent ionic current flow in vivo [37].
The ideal resolution to these uncertainties over material properties would be to remeasure the resistivities of all the cochlear
tissues using an accurate and up-to-date technique [38]. At the
least, this would provide an alternative data point for comparison with the values derived from lumped-element models; at
best, these values would form a new gold standard as inputs for
future electroanatomical studies of the cochlea.
C. Boundary Conditions
Three criteria were considered for evaluating the boundary
conditions: closeness of match to the in vivo terminal voltages
[see Fig. 7(b)], the current paths exiting the cochlea (see Fig. 9),
and the impact on AF values (see Fig. 11).
Grounding the nerve trunk seemed to make sense based on
early evidence that the nerve trunk is the dominant exit pathway
[39]. Using this boundary condition, simulated voltages were
relatively high because current was forced to flow through a
small return area. However, the otic capsule is not a perfect insulator and both the stimulating and return electrodes are small
relative to the head, so injected current spreads out as it flows
through the cochlear tissues and is not expected to reconverge

196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

within the domain [16], [40] as observed in Fig. 9(a). Because
of this, the AF plot [see Fig. 11(a)] predicted substantially more
widespread depolarization than the other boundary conditions.
Combined with the relative proximity of this isosurface to the regions of interest within the domain, it appears that this boundary
condition violates Saint–Venant’s Principle of far field equivalence by not faithfully reproducing true MP loading patterns.
The evidence suggests that grounding the end of the modeled
nerve trunk is inappropriate, at least in the case of the guinea
pig cochlea.
Simply grounding an outer surface to represent the current
sink is also insufficient. It ignores the presence of the return path
through the head and thus underestimates intrascalar voltages
[see Fig. 7(b)]. Including the return path as an infinite domain
is plausible, but tends to overestimate voltages. Of course, this
depends on the resistivity of the infinite domain, and a value
could be applied that forces a match with the in vivo data, but that
would alter the ratio of resistivities between the temporal bone
and other cochlear tissues, which could result in unintended
effects on the current paths within the cochlea [4], [15] and
the AF [e.g., Fig. 10(b)]. This is not ideal because resistivities
are not a variable and can be measured. The value used for the
infinite element domain in this study appears to be higher than
the effective resistivity of the mean guinea pig head. In any case,
purely grounded boundary conditions cannot be easily matched
to in vivo data, which may be important in future subject-specific
modeling efforts.
Given that none of the aforementioned boundary conditions
presented a close match to the in vivo data, the voltage offset was
proposed and tested. This alternative explanation for the voltage
drop along the unmodeled return path through the head did
not seem to influence the current pathways or AF, presumably
because it is canceled out in the calculation. Its value could,
therefore, be set arbitrarily to model different cases, as required
for subject-specific models. The principle could also be applied
to cochlear models of other species.
The offset would ideally be applied to a grounding surface
that replicates the in vivo current paths. In these simulations,
grounding the temporal bone surface was considered to be the
most realistic because the protrusion of the guinea pig cochlea
into the tympanic bulla, the low voltages exhibited during CI
stimulation, and the extremely high impedance of air together
suggested that injected current would flow away from the bulla
[see Fig 9(c)]. However, there is no way to be sure without
implementing a complete guinea pig head model.
Ultimately, grounding surfaces need to be sufficiently large
and far from the stimulating electrode in models of MP stimulation to prevent adverse impacts on the computed AF.

cal stimulation suggest that the modeled insertion was slightly
deeper than the in vivo average. This adds a little uncertainty to
the in silico predictions, but the close fit inspires confidence in
the model nonetheless.
Another concern was that the in vivo measurements were
taken at the end of the stimulating phase. It is known that the
voltage profile changes over the duration of the pulse, and there
is some speculation that time-dependent effects may play a role
despite Spelman’s observations [19]. Until this hypothesis is
tested, the purely resistive formulation of this model should
only be taken as a first approximation.
Finally, the sample size for the in vivo measurements was
relatively small. Ideally, more measurements would be added to
the comparison to increase the statistical power, but this must
be balanced against the financial, time, and ethical costs of
obtaining these additional data points. It is expected that if in
silico models such as the one presented here become sufficiently
accurate and trustworthy, the reliance on animal testing may be
reduced in the future.
VI. CONCLUSION
The workflow used in this study successfully overcame the
difficulties seen in other in silico modeling methodologies to
enable the creation of a high-fidelity FE model of the guinea
pig cochlea. Intrascalar voltages predicted by the model were
more sensitive to the choice of boundary condition than to the
assigned tissue resistivity values. However, the AF along the
neural sheet was more sensitive to certain material properties.
Grounding the nerve trunk appeared to be inappropriate for
the guinea pig model; conversely, the proposed voltage offset
boundary condition was able to characterize multiple facets of
the in vivo situation realistically. In addition, the offset provides
a feasible method for accommodating subject-specific differences, and may, therefore, be considered for use in future models
of monopolar CI stimulation. Overall, the strong correlation between the in silico results and the average in vivo measurements
indicated that the model can be used to represent an average
implanted guinea pig cochlea.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank P. Santi at the University of
Minnesota for obtaining the sTSLIM scans, J. Kirk at Cochlear
Americas for sharing them, and N. Pawsey and J. Giorgio at
Cochlear, Ltd., for providing access to Amira and generating
CAD models of the electrode array.
REFERENCES

D. Study Limitations
The trajectory of the electrode array within the scala tympani
was unlikely to be a perfect match despite taking care to accurately replicate the insertion at the round window. HL8 arrays
tend toward a more lateral position, but the exact in vivo positions of each electrode were not confirmed in this study. Each
insertion was also slightly different, and the data for more api-

[1] U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2012, May). Computational Modeling in Medical Devices. Presented at ASME V&V Symposium. [Online].
Available: https://cstools.asme.org/CSConnect/FileUpload.cfm?View=
yes&ID=36699
[2] G. Girzon, “Investigation of current flow in the inner ear during electrical
stimulation of intracochlear electrodes,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng. &
Comp. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 1987.
[3] F. G. Zeng et al., “Cochlear implants: System design, integration, and
evaluation,” Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, pp. 115–142, 2008.

WONG et al.: DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF A HIGH-FIDELITY FINITE-ELEMENT MODEL OF MONOPOLAR STIMULATION

[4] A. G. Micco and C. P. Richter, “Tissue resistivities determine the current
flow in the cochlea,” Curr. Opin. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., vol. 14,
no. 5, pp. 352–355, 2006.
[5] G. Cooper and A. L. Schiller, Anatomy of the Guinea Pig, Cambridge,
MA, USA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1975.
[6] C. C. Finley et al., “Models of neural responsiveness to electrical stimulation,” in Cochlear Implants, New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1990,
pp. 55–96.
[7] J. H. M. Frijns et al., “Potential distributions and neural excitation patterns
in a rotationally symmetric model of the electrically stimulated cochlea,”
Hear. Res., vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 170–186, 1995.
[8] J. H. M. Frijns et al., “Integrated use of volume conduction and neural
models to simulate the response to cochlear implants,” Simulat. Pract.
Theory, vol. 8, no. 1–2, pp. 75–97, 2000.
[9] T. Hanekom, “Three-dimensional spiraling finite element model of the
electrically stimulated cochlea,” Ear Hear., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 300–315,
2001.
[10] F. Rattay et al., “A model of the electrically excited human cochlear
neuron. II. Influence of the three-dimensional cochlear structure on neural
excitability,” Hear. Res., vol. 153, pp. 64–79, 2001.
[11] C. T. M. Choi et al., “Optimization of cochlear implant electrode array
using genetic algorithms and computational neuroscience models,” IEEE
Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 639–642, Mar. 2004.
[12] D. M. Whiten, “Electro-anatomical models of the cochlear implant,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Div. Health Sci. & Tech., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2007.
[13] J. Frijns et al., “Stimulation of the facial nerve by intracochlear electrodes
in otosclerosis: A computer modeling study,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 30, no.
8, pp. 1168–1174, 2009.
[14] R. Saba, “Cochlear implant modelling: Stimulation and power consumption,” Ph.D. dissertation, Faculty Eng. & Environ., Univ. Southampton,
Southampton, U.K., 2012.
[15] P. Wong et al., “Effect of petrous bone resistivities on volume conduction
in the cochlea,” presented at the 3rd Int. Conf. Medical Bionics, Phillip
Island, Australia, Nov. 17–20, 2013.
[16] P. Tran et al., “Development of HEATHER for cochlear implant stimulation using a new modeling workflow,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62,
no. 2, pp. 728–735, Feb. 2015.
[17] P. A. Santi, “Light sheet fluorescence microscopy: A review,” J. Histochem.
Cytochem., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 129–138, 2011.
[18] F. A. Spelman et al., “Measurements of the resistivity of bony tissues of
the cochlea,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1987,
pp. 1911–1912.
[19] F. A. Spelman et al., “Tissue impedance and current flow in the implanted
ear: Implications for the cochlear prosthesis,” Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol.
Suppl., vol. 98, no. 3, pp. 3–8, 1982.
[20] M. F. Suesserman, “Noninvasive microelectrode measurement technique
for performing quantitative, in vivo measurements of inner ear tissue
impedances,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA, 1992.
[21] C. Gabriel et al., “Electrical conductivity of tissue at frequencies below
1 MHz,” Phys. Med. Biol, vol. 54, pp. 4863–4878, 2009.
[22] S. N. Mohapatra et al., “Blood resistivity and its implications for the calculation of cardiac output by the thoracic electrical impedance technique,”
Intens. Care Med., vol. 3, pp. 63–67, 1977.
[23] C. R. Johnson, “Computational methods and software for bioelectric field
problems,” in Biomedical Engineering Fundamentals, Boca Raton, FL,
USA: CRC Press, 2006.
[24] J. J. Briaire and J. H. M. Frijns, “3D mesh generation to solve the electrical
volume conduction problem in the implanted inner ear,” Simulat. Pract.
Theory, vol. 8, no. 1–2, pp. 57–73, 2000.
[25] J. A. N. Buytaert et al., “MicroCT versus sTSLIM 3D imaging of the
mouse cochlea,” J. Histochem. Cytochem., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 382–395,
2013.
[26] P. Wong et al., “Sensitivity of cochlear volume conduction models to
boundary conditions,” presented at the Conf. Implantable Auditory Prostheses, Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, Jul. 14–19, 2013.
[27] C. C. Finley, “A finite-element model of radial bipolar field patterns in the
electrically stimulated cochlea—Two and three dimensional approximations and tissue parameter sensitivities,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1989, pp. 1059–1060.
[28] R. K. Kalkman et al., “Place pitch versus electrode location in a realistic computational model of the implanted human cochlea,” Hear. Res.,
vol. 315, pp. 10–24, 2014.

197

[29] J. P. Reilly, Applied Bioelectricity: From Electrical Stimulation to Electropathology. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[30] C. V. D. Honert and D. C. Kelsall, “Focused intracochlear electric stimulation with phased array channels,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 121, no. 6,
pp. 3703–3716, 2007.
[31] J. Haueisen et al., “Influence of tissue resistivities on neuromagnetic fields
and electric potentials studied with a finite element model of the head,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 727–735, Aug. 1997.
[32] P. A. Williams and S. Saha, “The electrical and dielectric properties of
human bone tissue and their relationship with density and bone mineral
content,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 222–233, 1996.
[33] D. Strelioff, “A computer simulation of the generation and distribution of
cochlear potentials,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 620–629,
1973.
[34] W. M. Grill, and J. T. Mortimer, “Electrical properties of implant encapsulation tissue,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 23–33, 1994.
[35] T. Hanekom, “Modelling encapsulation tissue around cochlear implant
electrodes,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 47–55, 2005.
[36] T. H. Bast and B. J. Anson, The Temporal Bone and the Ear. Springfield, IL, USA: CC Thomas, 1949.
[37] P. Dallos et al., The Cochlea, vol. 8. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag,
1996.
[38] F. A. Spelman, “Determination of tissue impedances of the inner ear:
Models and measurements,” in Cochlear Implants, New York, NY, USA:
Springer, 1990, pp. 35–54.
[39] G. V. Békésy, Experiments Hearing, vol. 8, E. G. Wever, Ed. New York,
NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1960.
[40] L. E. Baker, “Principles of the impedance technique,” IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Mag., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 11–15, Mar. 1989.

Paul Wong received the B.E. (Mech. Eng. (Biomed.))
(Hons. I) degree and the B.Com. degree in Finance
from The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia, in 2010, where he is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering in conjunction with Cochlear Ltd., Sydney.
His current research interests include to improve computational models of the cochlea to better understand the spatial effects of cochlear implant
stimulation.

Shefin George received the B.Tech. (Biomed. Eng.)
degree from the Cochin University of Science and
Technology, Kochi, India, in 2007, and the M.E.
(Biomed.) degree from Latrobe University, Bundoora, Australia, in 2011. She is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in medical bionics at the
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, in
conjunction with the Bionics Institute, Melbourne,
Australia.
She was a Systems Analyst at Tata Consultancy
Services, India, from 2007 to 2009 and worked in
smart card design and development. Following the M.E., she was a Biomedical
Engineer with Chemtronics Biomedical Engineering, Australia, in 2011.
Her current research interests include investigating current focusing stimulation techniques for cochlear implants using electrophysiological studies.

Phillip Tran received the B.E. (Mech. Eng.
(Biomed.)) (Hons. I) degree and the B.Sc. (Adv.) degree in chemistry from The University of Sydney,
Camperdown, Australia, in 2010, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering in conjunction with Cochlear Ltd.,
Sydney, Australia.
His research interests include computational
modeling of the human head for cochlear implant
stimulation.

198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Andrian Sue received the B.E. (Mech. Eng.
(Biomed.)) (Hons. I) degree and the B.Med.Sc. degree from The University of Sydney, Camperdown,
Australia, in 2010, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering in
conjunction with Cochlear Ltd., Sydney, Australia.
His research interests include the safety of neural
stimulation and the use of computational methods to
predict the safety of stimulation electrodes.

Paul Carter received the B.S. degree in physics with
solid state electronics from the University of Exeter,
Exeter, U.K., in 1982, and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics from the University of Southampton,
Southampton, U.K., in 1987.
He lectured in the Department of Electrical
and Computing Engineering, University of Wollongong, Australia, from 1987 to 1992. He then joined
Cochlear, Ltd., where he is currently working as a Senior Principal Research Engineer, the Head of Electrode Science, and a Discipline Leader for Electrodes
and Stimulation Safety. He also holds an Honorary Professorship in biomedical
engineering from The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia.
His research interests include electroanatomical modeling, the properties of
the electrode–tissue interface, and the safety of neural stimulation.
Dr. Carter is a Fellow of the Institute of Engineers, Australia.

Qing Li received the Ph.D. degree in aerospace engineering from The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia, in 2000.
Following the Ph.D., he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA,
before returning to The University of Sydney in 2001
as an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow. He was a Senior Lecturer at James Cook University, Townsville,
Australia, in 2004, and then, at The University of
Sydney, in 2006. He became an Associate Professor
in the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, The University of Sydney, in 2010. He is currently an ARC
Future Fellow and Professor in biomedical engineering at The University of
Sydney.
His current research interests include computational modeling, biomechanics, biomaterials, scaffold tissue engineering, crashworthiness, and design
optimization.

