984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Novel Bone-Anchored Vascular Access on the
Mastoid for Hemodialysis: Concept
and Preclinical Trials
Christof Stieger, Andreas Arnold∗ , Anja Kruse, Simona Wiedmer, Matthias Widmer, Jérémie Guignard,
Daniel Schütz, Jean-Marc Guenat, Matthias Bachtler, Marco Caversaccio, Dominik E. Uehlinger,
Felix J. Frey, and Rudolf Häusler

Abstract—Goal: We present the development of a bone-anchored
port for the painless long-term hemodialytic treatment of patients
with renal failure. This port is implanted behind the ear. Methods: The port was developed based on knowledge obtained from
long-term experience with implantable hearing devices, which are
firmly anchored to the bone behind the ear. This concept of bone
anchoring was adapted to the requirements for a vascular access
during hemodialysis. The investigational device is comprised of a
base plate that is firmly fixed with bone screws to the bone behind
the ear (temporal bone). A catheter leads from the base plate valve
block through the internal jugular vein and into the right atrium.
The valves are opened using a special disposable adapter, without
any need to puncture the blood vessels. Between hemodialysis sessions, the port is protected with a disposable cover. Results: Flow
rate, leak tightness, and purification were tested on mockups. Preoperative planning and the surgical procedure were verified in 15
anatomical human whole head specimens. Conclusion: Preclinical
evaluations demonstrated the technical feasibility and safety of the
investigational device. Significance: Approximately 1.5 million people are treated with hemodialysis worldwide, and 25% of the overall cost of dialysis therapy results from vascular access problems.
New approaches toward enhancing vascular access could potentially reduce the costs and complications of hemodialytic therapy.
Index Terms—Biomedical equipment, blood exchange,
catheters, implantable biomedical devices, kidney, valves, vascular
access.

I. INTRODUCTION
N 2008, an otolaryngologist named Häusler and a nephrologist named Frey developed the novel concept of using a
transmastoidal route for vascular access during hemodialytic

I

Manuscript received May 4, 2015; revised September 14, 2015; accepted
September 15, 2015. Date of publication September 18, 2015; date of current
version May 19, 2016. C. Stieger and A. Arnold contributed equally to this work.
This work was supported by the Commission for Technology and Innovation
of the Swiss Confederation under Grant 9952, Grant 12593, and Grant 13753.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
C. Stieger was with ARTORG, University of Bern. He is now with the University of Basel.
∗ A. Arnold is with ARTORG and Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern 3010,
Switzerland (e-mail: andreas.arnold@insel.ch).
A. Kruse, M. Widmer, J. Guignard, M. Bachtler, M. Caversaccio,
D. E. Uehlinger, F. J. Frey, and R. Häusler are with ARTORG and Inselspital, University of Bern.
S. Wiedmer was with ARTORG, University of Bern. She is now with the
Cendres et Métaux SA.
D. Schütz and J.-M. Guenat are with the Cendres et Métaux SA.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2480241

treatment. A device to facilitate such access was subsequently
developed with the support of engineers and clinicians at the
University Hospital of Bern (Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland),
in collaboration with engineers at Cendres+Métaux SA (Biel,
Switzerland) [1].
The essence of this idea is that a bone-anchored vascular
access located within the mastoid region, where the skin lays
directly over the bone, would be less prone to inflammation
and infection than the commonly employed accesses in soft
tissues, such as in the clavicular or abdominal region. There is
some evidence that bone-anchored implants are well accepted by
the body; notable examples include the bone-anchored hearing
aid Baha (Cochlear, Sydney, Australia) and the percutaneous
pedestal from the first Cochlear Implant system Ineraid [2]–[5].
Recently, a cranial bone-anchored port (BAP) system for drug
delivery to the cerebrospinal fluid was reported [6]. Furthermore
the mastoid region seems to be particularly favorable in order
to establish vascular access because of its vicinity to the jugular
vein, which runs below the mastoid.
To date, no randomized controlled outcome data exist regarding the use of intensified dialysis therapy. Nevertheless, thrice
weekly regular dialysis therapy results in only a fraction of
the effectiveness of normal renal function in terms of average
weekly clearance values. Given the impressive performance of
nightly and especially short daily hemodialysis sessions [7], [8]
with respect to fluid and electrolyte removal, blood pressure control, and reversal of left ventricular hypertrophy [7], intensified
dialysis therapy is expected to be prescribed more frequently in
the future, especially in home hemodialysis settings. However,
conventional hemodialysis access may not be suitable for an increased frequency of punctures [9], and alternative methods of
creating vascular accesses must be investigated [10]. A crucial
consideration is the ability to ensure transcutaneous access to
large blood vessels. While subcutaneous ports in the subclavicular region are advantageous as they do not require soft-tissue
penetration during catheter placement [11], [12], they still require repeated puncturing of the skin.
Here, we present the technical development and preclinical
evaluation of a novel port for hemodialysis, which is fixed on the
mastoid bone behind the ear. We elucidate the design approach
and requirements of the device in Section II, its conceptual
design in Section III, the development of the surgical tools and
surgical procedure in Section IV, and finally its feasibility in
Section V.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

STIEGER et al.: NOVEL BONE-ANCHORED VASCULAR ACCESS ON THE MASTOID FOR HEMODIALYSIS

Fig. 1. Anatomical relations of the implanted port, with its catheter running
through a short tunnel and a groove in the mastoid area, then over the sternocleidomastoid muscle and finally into the jugular vein, with its tip (not shown)
reaching the right cardial atrium.

II. DESIGN APPROACH AND REQUIREMENTS
The development of our BAP system relies on a combination of considerations, including hemodialytic principles, boneanchored implant surgery, and central venous catheter insertion.
The essential requirements defined by nephrologists were to
establish vascular access without puncturing the skin multiple
times per week, as is the case in hemodialytic procedures using fistulas or other ports [10], [11]. The device should employ
standard connectors in order to maintain the established clinical
procedures for connection and disconnection with the hemodialysis machine. A double lumen catheter should be used for blood
retraction (venous branch) and reapplication after filtration of
the blood in the dialyzer (arterial branch). The possibility of
delivering a flow rate of more than 300 mL/min [13] is required
to avoid potentially excessive mechanical stress on red blood
cells, as compared to conventional dialysis catheters. Furthermore, the catheter should be exchangeable in case of clotting
and/or infection, the most common adverse events that arise
following central venous catheter placement.
The surgery should be based on the implantation procedure
known from bone-conduction hearing aids. The dimensions
of the device should be comparable to other implantable devices used in the mastoid cavity [14]. A firm fixation to the
bone using screws should limit relative movements between
bone and skin, and implant during manipulation of the system.
The surgical strategy should avoid exposure of delicate structures, such as the dura mater, the sigmoid sinus, the facial nerve,
and the lower cranial nerves. While not harmful, per se, the
exposure of these structures is nevertheless undesirable.
Fig. 1 shows a generic drawing of such a device. The port,
which penetrates the skin, is firmly fixed to the bone behind
the ear. This concept is similar to percutaneous devices, such
as the Baha [2], the pedestal from the first cochlear implant
Ineraid [3] or the percutaneous power delivery of a left ventricle
assist device (LVAD) [15]. The location of the facial nerve is
clearly anterior, and the XI-XII cranial nerves and the carotid

985

Fig. 2. Investigational Device of the Bone Anchored Port. The base plate,
catheter and valve block are assembled during surgery. A disposable cover is
used between hemodialysis sessions for mechanical and biological protection
of the port. During hemodialysis the cover is removed and the adapter is connected to the valve block. The valve port adapter contains individual clamps for
independent closure of each channel in addition to standard dialysis connectors.

artery pass medially. The catheter runs through a drilled groove
in the mastoid and over the sternocleidomastoid muscle before
entering the jugular vein, providing a connection from the port
to the superior vena cava and the right atrium of the heart.
III. CONCEPTUAL DESIGN OF THE BAP
Fig. 2 shows the design composition of the investigational device. It consists of the following major parts: the base plate, valve
block, catheter, cover, and port adapter. The base plate, catheter,
and valve box are assembled during surgery (see Section IV).
All metal parts are made of titanium grade 4 kV (according to
ASTM F 67).
The base plate is firmly fixed to the bone behind the ear.
The insertion depth of the base plate was initially defined based
on bone thickness measurements obtained from 20 temporal
bone computed tomography (CT) scans. After the first series of
implantations using a depth of 7 mm, the minimal thickness of
the remaining bone covering the dura was found to range from
1.1 to 0 mm (0 mm indicates dura exposure). The base plate was
then redesigned to acquire a final implantation depth of 5 mm.
This significantly improved the thickness of the remaining bone
(2.8 to 0.55 mm; p < 0.001).
The width of the implant (26 mm at the bone; 28.8 mm at
the sealing cap) is determined by a combination of the size of
the valve block and the space needed for the screw holes. The
number of screws necessary for the procedure (8 commercial
titanium cortical screws, 8 mm length, diameter 2 mm) was
defined using finite-element method (FEM) analysis and pull
out tests using artificial bone. The height of the base plate is
7 mm. Similar to cochlear implant surgery, if necessary, the
skin at the implant site will be surgically freed from excess
subcutaneous tissue with a scalpel.
The opening at the bottom side of the base plate allows tight
insertion of the catheter. The double lumen catheter is connected
to the valve block and subsequently pinched into the base plate.

986

The far end of the catheter is positioned in the right atrium
(not shown in the figure). The modular separation between the
base plate and the valve block allows for the exchange of the
catheter whenever necessary without requiring extraction of the
base plate.
The valve block provides airtight closure of the catheter between hemodialysis sessions. The design of the device also
allows exchange of the valves as needed. The valve system is
protected against pollution and mechanical stress on the valves
with a single-use cover.
The creation of a short tunnel next to the implant (see Fig. 1)
versus a simple groove was motivated by the tight attachment of
the titanium implants (via osseointegration) to the surrounding
skin and bone, which allowed the device to be sealed to produce
a stable and infection-free interface.
A. Hemodialysis Procedure Using the Port
We defined a therapy handbook for the BAP, which includes
all the steps for the hemodialysis procedure. In the first step, the
closed port is disinfected, and then the cover is removed. All
further steps are done with sterile gloves and a surgical mask.
After disinfection, the port is visually checked and the main
valve is replaced if necessary (cf., Section III-D). The skin is
then inspected for signs of inflammation, in which antibiotic
ointment is applied locally or systemic antibiotics are given.
The main valve is disinfected and the single-use adapter, prefilled with saline in order to prevent any air enclosure, is pushed
into the guide groove until it clicks into the place. The adapter is
designed so that as it is guided into its final position and opens the
valve (Patent Schütz, Guenat Auderset, Stieger, Frey, Häusler,
Implantable Vascular Access, U.S. Patent 2012/0157924). After the adapter is connected, a standard hemodialytic procedure
is performed. This includes the removal of the lock solution
(sodium citrate) and the filling of the arterial (red) and venous
(blue) lumen with physiologic saline prior to connection to the
hemodialysis machine. At the end of the hemodialysis session,
the machine is disconnected and the arterial and venous lumina
of the catheter are refilled with lock solution. The adapter is removed and the port is disinfected and secured with a new cover.
B. Blood Flow
Maintaining a minimum pump flow rate of 300 mL/min on
the hemodialysis machine should not increase hemolysis (i.e.,
mechanical destruction of red blood cells) [10], [16], [17]. We
addressed this requirement by employing experiments and simulations of the pressure difference to determine the subsequent
development of shear stress. The effects produced by shear stress
on red blood cells are related to the duration of exposure of the
blood to the stress, hence the relevance of determining the shear
rate. Physiologically, shear rate is reported to be in the range of
1000 to 10 000 s−1 . Shear rates above 10 000 s−1 are considered
pathological [18]. We found that the pressure drop induced by
our port is comparable to that produced by other commercial
catheter connectors and that the shear rate is less then 8000 s−1
for flow rates below 500 mL/min, which is still in the physiological range [19].

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

C. Purification
A clean environment is crucial to hemodialysis. The cleaning
process is performed with sterile gloves and a lint-free swab
soaked with alcoholic disinfectant. This process reduced the
concentration of microorganisms by a factor of 106 in a test solution containing defibrinated sheep blood exposed to the following organic contaminants: Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Enterobacter aerogen.

D. Valve Block and Adapter
For safe connection to the hemodialysis system, a plug-on
adapter penetrates the sealing membrane. The membrane was
designed and validated for impermeability at a pressure of up to
1050 mmHg (140 kPa) when not connected.
The membrane will only open with the adapter plugged into
the valve. Guiding rails on the valve ensure that the placement
of the adapter is only possible in a single configuration, which
secures alignment. The adapter tips penetrate the microslits in
the membrane and make the system operationally ready for
hemodialysis. After being connected to the system 12 times,
the membrane must be replaced. This exchange is performed
with an especially developed tool, while the port is sealed with
a secondary valve within the valve block.
The methods and results of the preclinical tests, as well as
their implications for clinical use are summarized in Table I.

IV. SURGICAL PROCEDURE
In otologic surgery, drilling into the mastoid is guided by
orientation to specific surgical landmarks (e.g., bony external
auditory canal, spina henle, linea temporalis, lateral semicircular canal, facial nerve canal, and ossicles). The most important
anatomical structures in the vicinity of the mastoid are the underlying dura mater and the sigmoid sinus. While exposure of
these structures might be necessary under certain circumstances,
injury to these regions must be avoided. Initial device implantations revealed difficulties with the drilling process. Resulting
cavities were irregular and often bigger than needed. In addition, exposure of the dura was a frequent occurrence, despite
the availability of CT scanning.
Therefore, we developed the following tools to improve the
surgical procedure: 1) a bone thickness map and 2) bone drilling
templates (see Figs. 3 and 4).
Using our bone thickness map, we can preoperatively define
the optimal positioning of the implant. The map is generated
based on the preoperative CT. Two anatomical landmarks, the
spina henle (i.e., the bony spur at the superior border of the entrance to the external ear canal) and the prolongation of zygoma,
allow us to transfer a generated map to the actual anatomy of the
patient during the surgery. This tool was first evaluated for experimental surgical trials on anatomical whole head specimens
[20], and has further been used during the implantation of the
bone-anchored hearing system Bonebridge [21].
The second tool that we developed consists of five templates
designed to support the surgeon in drilling an accurate bone bed

STIEGER et al.: NOVEL BONE-ANCHORED VASCULAR ACCESS ON THE MASTOID FOR HEMODIALYSIS

987

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF PRECLINICAL TESTS
Preclinical Test
Flow rate I [19]

Flow rate II [19]

Valve tightness (static pressure)

Cover (tightness)
Cover (mechanical stability)

Preoperative planning [20]

Purification

Screw stability I

Screw stability II

Method
Computed simulation using COMSOL
(Burlington, MA, USA) of the flow of the
adapter, valve block and catheter.
In vitro, water solution, connected to a
hemodialysis machine. With flow rates
between 100 and 500 mL/min. Arterial
and venous pressure drop measurements.
Mockup and prototypes tested for air and
liquid leakage based on standard EN ISO
10555 for intravascular catheters.
Leakage testing (static) with water column.
Validation of mechanical resistance
(impact tests).

Result

Implications for clinical use
−1

Shear rate is below 8000 s for a blood
Dialysis feasible up to 500 mL/min
flow of 500 mL/min. Vortices appear
locally.
Pressure drop of the entire BAP system is Hemolysis comparable to existing catheter
similar to commercial catheter. The main
systems.
pressure drop occurs at the catheter tip and
not inside the valve block.
Water tight up to 140 kPa (1050 mmHg). Upside down position is possible without
No air bubbles formed during defined time.
leak of blood.
Tightness proved up to 30 cm water
column.
Cover protects against quotidian
mechanical stress (manipulation), but not
direct head trauma.

Bone thickness map based on CT scans.
Reduction of exposure of: -Dura mater
10 cadaver implantations with map and 5 100% to 20% -Sigmoid sinus 40% to 0%.
without.
Cleaning led to a 106 germ reduction.
Standardized cleaning procedure after
exposure with sheep blood including
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus
aureus, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter
aerogenes.
Pull out tests with single self-tapping
Maximum force at failure: 250–550 N
titanium screw (6 mm length, 2 mm
Elastic Slope: 450–1000 N/mm Yield
diameter) on a human temporal bone (TB).
stress: 100–950 N.
FEM computer simulations on different -Screw length is the most important factor
geometries and numbers of screws with
in terms of maximal force at failure, in
Abaqus CAE. (Dassault, Paris, France).
both shear and tensile load. -In terms of
elastic slope and yield stress, it is possible
to trade length of the screws with a higher
number of screws.

Tightness for everyday activities (e.g.,
shower, dusty environment).
In case of cover loss or direct trauma, the
implant site must be checked for damage
and the cover must be replaced by the
hemodialysis center.
The map increases the safety of the
implantation procedure.
Standardized cleaning procedure
important for infection risk reduction.

Baseline values for FEM simulation (cf.,
screw stability II below).
At least six of possible eight screws with
8 mm length (i.e., 2 mm in the base plate
and 6 mm in the bone) with 2 mm
diameter for implant stability.

Fig. 4. To facilitate a safe surgical procedure during implantation, five tools
are used. These tools aid in the positioning (positioner, holes template) and
stabilization (rim cutter) of the base plate, and in the drilling of the catheter
tunnel (tunnel preparer, tunnel finalizer).
Fig. 3. Thickness map of the temporal bone generated from computed tomography, for use in base plate positioning. The shades indicate the thickness of the
bone. The concentric circles correspond to isodistances from the spina henle at
10 and 20 mm. The line delineates the prolongation of the zygoma.

(see Fig. 4). The function of these templates is described in the
surgical procedure below.
A. Implantations Trial
We developed the implantation procedure using anatomical
human whole head specimens embalmed according to Thiel.
The advantage of Thiel’s embalming is the preservation of mechanical tissue properties. Thiel specimens are used for surgical training [22] and research [23]. We used 15 whole head

specimens (six males, nine females) in this study (average age:
81.6 years, range 78 to 98). The local ethics committee approved
the use of embalmed cadaveric head specimens for our research
(KEK-BE 030/08).
The implantation trial included the development of a surgical workflow to implant the bone-anchored device to the bony
area behind the pinna and to establish a vascular access for the
device’s catheter system.
B. Step-by-Step Surgical Procedure for the BAP
The main steps of the implantation procedure are detailed in
Fig. 5. First, we created a wide skin incision similar to those

988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 5. Steps of device implantation (see text for detailed description): soft-tissue preparation (a); positioning (b); stabilization rim cutting (c), (d); hole and cavity
drilling (e)–(g); catheter groove and tunnel drilling (h)–(j); catheter placement (k), (l); valve block mounting (m); system test (n); ear and neck wound closure (o).

made in other surgical procedures to the ear, such as cochlear
implantation. Next, we sparingly removed the periosteum at the
implantation site. Following this, we created an incision in the
periosteum from the implantation site to the mastoid tip and
uncovered the bone to prepare for the drilling of the catheter
groove [see Fig. 5(a)].
The positioner template is placed at the implantation site to
guide drilling of the two initial holes, which is accomplished
using a 1.5 mm × 10 mm spiral burr [see Fig. 5(b)].
The rim cutter consists of two pieces: an alignment-andguidance middle piece to guarantee that the groove is at the
predefined position and a handle with a circular diamond surface on the bottom, which slides over the middle piece and can
be manually twisted [see Fig. 5(c)]. This creates an even circular
groove into which the templates and the base plate can fit stably

[see Fig. 5(d)]. Next, we placed the drilling template into the circular groove [see Fig. 5(e)] and used a 1.5 mm × 10 mm spiral
burr drill tip to create another six holes for the fixation screws.
Furthermore, two holes mark the limit of the bony catheter
groove from the mastoid tip and the holes in the center outline
the borders of the cavity to accommodate the bottom section
of the base plate [see Fig. 5(f)]. We drilled the cavity using
standard free-hand otosurgical burrs [see Fig. 5(g)].
The bony catheter groove is drilled from the implant site down
to the mastoid tip. Using the tunnel preparer tool, we drilled
guiding holes for the short catheter tunnel [see Fig. 5(h)]. The
tunnel is created using the tunnel finalizer and otosurgical burrs
[see Fig. 5(i) and (j)].
The internal jugular vein was exposed using a short neck incision. After placing the catheter into the right heart atrium using

STIEGER et al.: NOVEL BONE-ANCHORED VASCULAR ACCESS ON THE MASTOID FOR HEMODIALYSIS

the standard Seldinger technique [24], a subcutaneous tunnel is
prepared for the catheter, spanning through the neck up to the
mastoid tip [see Fig. 5(k)]. Preparation of the supra sternocleidomastoid subcutaneous tunnel to accommodate the insertion
of the catheter followed the principles of transcutaneous subclavian catheter implantation.
After gently pulling the catheter into the subcutaneous tunnel,
we placed the catheter into the groove and guided it through the
tunnel and into the implant base plate [see Fig. 5(l)].
An initial test of the catheter lumina functionality was performed (not shown).
The implant base plate was tightly secured using up to eight
self-cutting cortical screws and, after the connection to the
catheter, the valve section was screwed to the base plate [see
Fig. 5(m)].
The skin flap was pulled over the implant and incised. With
the dialysis adaptor attached, we performed a patency test of
the catheter lumina and finally filled the catheter with a sodium
citrate locking solution [see Fig. 5(n)].
Following the disinfection and placement of the cover,
we then closed the retroauricular and cervical incisions [see
Fig. 5(o)].
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
While hemodialysis device malfunction is rare, vascular
access presents a major problem with high morbidity [25],
[26]. Indeed, chronic hemodialysis therapy became possible
only after the problem of generating a reliable vascular access
was resolved [27]–[29]. Nevertheless, access has continued
to be problematic since maintenance hemodialysis began
approximately 50 years ago. Repeated puncturing of the skin
to generate access imposes notable stress on patients [30], [31].
The main concern in creating hemodialysis access is blood
clotting and infection, and these issues determine the survival
rate of AV fistulas [25], [31], grafts, and the commonly used
transcutaneous catheter systems [26], [32].
Several approaches to transcutaneous port systems (such as
Dialock [11] and LifeSite [12]) have been attempted in the past
and were initially deemed successful; however, subsequent rates
of device failure and patient death led to the removal of these
devices from the market.
The concept presented here for generating hemodialytic vascular access is based on a completely novel approach, namely,
a percutaneous BAP on the mastoid. Bone-anchored solutions
have been successfully used in other long-term applications,
such as the Baha. Indeed, our clinical data on the Baha demonstrate that only a single explantation of the device occurred over
a cumulative time of 1220 Baha years [33]. However, data regarding the long-term stability of bone-anchored implants in the
mastoid of patients with renal failure, who are undergoing longterm hemodialysis, have not yet been reported in the literature.
It is notable, however, that dental implants [34] were reported to
be feasible in patients presenting with chronic renal failure [35].
Other mechanical implants have been used for the intraosseous transcutaneous amputation of limbs [36]–[38]. These

989

implants demonstrate the long-term stability of bone-anchored
percutaneous devices. Furthermore, in 1998, a bone-anchored
plug was implanted into the mastoid region for use not only
as a mechanical transfer device but also as an electrical power
transmission line to an LVAD [15]. Recently, a drug delivery
system was presented in an animal model. Similar to our device, the primary benefit of using a bone-anchored solution was
the long-term osseous and cutaneous integration of the device,
which prevented infection and subsequent implant loss and overcame the problems inherent to transcutaneous devices, such as
large internal dead volumes and the complications generated by
multiple needle penetrations of the skin. Barua et al. reported
that one implant was lost because of limited bone thickness
[6]. To reduce a similar occurrence when using our device, we
employed preoperative planning [20] and the use of surgical
templates. However, in contrast to multichannel drug delivery,
the hemodialytic procedures require substantially higher flow
rates (up to 500 mL/min), which requires the use of a larger
dimension catheter during our procedure. Therefore, our device requires an implant base plate that is significantly larger in
diameter.
Our results show that the surgical procedure for the implantation of the BAP is feasible and generally safe. To achieve a
high level of safety, several critical points were addressed, including: 1) optimization of the size of the implant substructure
that extends into the skull bone; 2) positioning of the implant to
avoid pinna and dura contact; and 3) assurance of precise and
adequate drilling procedures.
The size of the implant substructure was redesigned to reduce
the maximal depth from 7 mm to 5 mm.
Preoperative planning was used to position the implant at the
correct distance from the pinna, and at the correct bone depth to
avoid dura exposure. Injury of the dura must be avoided despite
the fact that limited exposition of the dura mater is often seen in
mastoid surgery and is not regarded to be a complication per se.
Furthermore, new implantable hearing devices routinely contact
the dura [39]. Nevertheless, we have developed a set of planning
and design approaches to ensure that the implant does not harm
the dura [21]. For example, the area in which we chose to drill
is sufficiently distant from the ear that contact with the pinna
is avoided, and it possesses sufficient cortical bone thickness to
prevent exposure of the dura mater.
Using drilling templates during the creation of the implant bed
and the short catheter tunnel next to the implant [see Fig. 5(e)–
(j)] reduced the exposure of delicate structures such as the sigmoid sinus or dura mater and improved the integrity of the
remaining small bony tunnel cover.
The feasibility of the implantation was tested on embalmed
anatomical human cadaver head preparations. These heads offer a natural surgical anatomy, and provide convenient handling
and storage. However, the blood vessels in these specimens are
empty, making the puncturing necessary for catheter insertion
difficult. The catheter placement method implemented into our
workflow is a standard procedure that is used daily in clinical practice. An alternative method of validating our procedure
would be the use of test animals (e.g., sheep, pig). However,

990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

animals have a considerably different skull anatomy that completely lacks the mastoid region and consequently does not allow
the development of implant placement tools for patient use.
In conclusion, our novel bone-anchored vascular access on
the mastoid for hemodialysis is technically feasible and can be
implanted safely in a cadaver model.
REFERENCES
[1] Implantable access for removal and/or return of fluids, by C. Stieger
et al., (2009, Aug. 28). Patent EP 2 092 943 A1 [Online]. Available:
espacenet.com
[2] A. Tjellstrom et al., “Osseointegrated titanium implants in the temporal
bone: A clinical study on bone-anchored hearing aids,” Amer. J. Otol.,
vol. 2, pp. 304–310, Apr. 1981.
[3] R. F. Gray et al., “Profound deafness treated by the Ineraid multichannel
intracochlear implant,” J. Laryngol. Otol., vol. 107, pp. 673–680, Aug.
1993.
[4] E. Wallberg et al., “Implant survival rate in bone-anchored hearing aid
users: Long-term results,” J. Laryngol. Otol., vol. 125, pp. 1131–1135,
Nov. 2011.
[5] Coupling to a bone-anchored hearing aid, by B. Hakansson. (1985, Feb.
12). Patent US 4 498 461 [Online]. Available: espacenet.com
[6] N. U. Barua et al., “Intermittent convection-enhanced delivery to the
brain through a novel transcutaneous bone-anchored port,” J. Neurosci.
Methods, vol. 214, pp. 223–232, Apr. 15, 2013.
[7] G. M. Chertow et al., “In-center hemodialysis six times per week versus
three times per week,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 363, pp. 2287–2300, Dec.
9, 2010.
[8] M. V. Rocco et al., “The effects of frequent nocturnal home hemodialysis:
The frequent hemodialysis network nocturnal trial,” Kidney Int., vol. 80,
pp. 1080–1091, Nov. 2011.
[9] F. H. N. T. Group et al., “In-center hemodialysis six times per week versus
three times per week,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 363, pp. 2287–2300, Dec.
9, 2010.
[10] Z. J. Twardowski, “Blood access in daily hemodialysis,” Hemodialysis
Int., vol. 8, pp. 70–76, Jan. 1, 2004.
[11] B. Canaud et al., “Dialock: A new vascular access device for extracorporeal renal replacement therapy. Preliminary clinical results,” Nephrol.
Dialysis Transplantation, vol. 14, pp. 692–698, Mar. 1999.
[12] S. J. Schwab et al., “Multicenter clinical trial results with the LifeSite
hemodialysis access system,” Kidney Int., vol. 62, pp. 1026–1033, Sep.
2002.
[13] R. A. Sherman et al., “Recirculation reassessed: The impact of blood flow
rate and the low-flow method reevaluated,” Amer. J. Kidney Dis., vol. 23,
pp. 846–848, Jun. 1994.
[14] A. M. Huber et al., “The Bonebridge: Preclinical evaluation of a new
transcutaneously-activated bone anchored hearing device,” Hearing Res.,
vol. 301, pp. 93–99, Jul. 2013.
[15] R. Jarvik et al., “LVAD power delivery: A percutaneous approach to avoid
infection,” Ann. Thoracic Surg., vol. 65, pp. 470–473, Feb. 1998.
[16] Z. J. Twardowski and J. D. Haynie, “Measurements of hemodialysis
catheter blood flow in vivo,” Int. J. Artif. Organs, vol. 25, pp. 276–280,
Apr. 2002.
[17] I. Van Tricht et al., “Hemodynamics and complications encountered with
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts as vascular access for hemodialysis: A
review,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, pp. 1142–1157, Sep. 2005.
[18] W. S. Nesbitt et al., “A shear gradient-dependent platelet aggregation
mechanism drives thrombus formation,” Nature Med., vol. 15, pp. 665–
673, Jun. 2009.
[19] J. Guignard et al., “Hemodynamics and flow characteristics of a new
dialysis port,” Amer. Soc. Artif. Internal Organs J., vol. 60, pp. 81–89,
Jan./Feb. 2014.

[20] J. Guignard et al., “A bone-thickness map as a guide for bone-anchored
port implantation surgery in the temporal bone,” Materials, vol. 6,
pp. 5291–5301, 2013.
[21] W. Wimmer et al., “Topographic bone thickness maps for Bonebridge
implantations,” Eur. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol., vol. 272, pp. 1651–1658,
Mar. 14, 2014.
[22] J. Alberty et al., “Thiel method fixed cadaver ears. A new procedure for
graduate and continuing education in middle ear surgery,” HNO, vol. 50,
pp. 739–742, Aug. 2002.
[23] J. Guignard et al., “Bone conduction in Thiel-embalmed cadaver heads,”
Hearing Res., vol. 306, pp. 115–122, Dec. 2013.
[24] S. I. Seldinger, “Catheter replacement of the needle in percutaneous arteriography: A new technique,” Acta Radiol., vol. 39, pp. 368–376, May
1953.
[25] A. A. Al-Jaishi et al., “Patency rates of the arteriovenous fistula for
hemodialysis: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Amer. J. Kidney
Dis., vol. 63, pp. 464–478, Mar. 2014.
[26] G. Ocak et al., “Haemodialysis catheters increase mortality as compared
to arteriovenous accesses especially in elderly patients,” Nephrol. Dialysis
Transplantation, vol. 26, pp. 2611–2617, Aug. 2010.
[27] K. Konner, “History of vascular access for haemodialysis,” Nephrol. Dialysis Transplantation, vol. 20, pp. 2629–2635, Dec. 2005.
[28] W. Quinton et al., “Cannulation of blood vessels for prolonged hemodialysis,” Trans. Amer. Soc. Artif. Internal Organs, vol. 6, pp. 104–113, Apr.
10–11, 1960.
[29] M. J. Brescia et al., “Chronic hemodialysis using venipuncture and a
surgically created arteriovenous fistula,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 275,
pp. 1089–1092, Nov. 17, 1966.
[30] M. Pfister et al., “Novel dialysis cannulas: Are they worth the higher price
tag?,” Amer. J. Kidney Dis., vol. 35, pp. 624–628, Apr. 2000.
[31] C. E. Lok et al., “Risk equation determining unsuccessful cannulation
events and failure to maturation in arteriovenous fistulas,” J. Amer. Soc.
Nephrol., vol. 17, pp. 3204–3212, Nov. 2006.
[32] D. A. Mosquera et al., “Vascular access surgery: A 2-year study
and comparison with the Permcath,” Nephrol. Dialysis Transplantation,
vol. 7, pp. 1111–1115, 1992.
[33] C. Candreia et al., “Predisposing factors for adverse skin reactions in
bone anchored hearing devices,” presented at the 12th Int. Conf. Cochlear
Implants Other Implantable Auditory Technologies, Baltimore, MD, USA,
May 3–5, 2012.
[34] P. I. Branemark and T. Albrektsson, “Titanium implants permanently penetrating human skin,” Scand. J. Plast. Reconstr. Surg., vol. 16, pp. 17–21,
1982.
[35] M. Dijakiewicz et al., “Is implanto-prosthodontic treatment available
for haemodialysis patients?” Nephrol. Dialysis Transplantation, vol. 22,
pp. 2722–2724, Sep. 2007.
[36] N. Fitzpatrick et al., “Intraosseous transcutaneous amputation prosthesis
(ITAP) for limb salvage in 4 dogs,” Vet. Surg., vol. 40, pp. 909–925, Dec.
2011.
[37] C. J. Pendegrass et al., “Development of a soft tissue seal around boneanchored transcutaneous amputation prostheses,” Biomaterials, vol. 27,
pp. 4183–4191, Aug. 2006.
[38] C. J. Pendegrass et al., “Sealing the skin barrier around transcutaneous
implants: In vitro study of keratinocyte proliferation and adhesion in response to surface modifications of titanium alloy,” J. Bone Joint Surg.
Brit., vol. 90, pp. 114–121, Jan. 2008.
[39] G. Kontorinis et al., “Anatomic limitations in implantation of middle
ear transducer and carina middle ear implants,” Laryngoscope, vol. 120,
pp. 2289–2293, Nov. 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

