964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Continuous Cuffless Blood Pressure Estimation
Using Pulse Transit Time and Photoplethysmogram
Intensity Ratio
Xiao-Rong Ding, Student Member, IEEE, Yuan-Ting Zhang, Fellow, IEEE, Jing Liu, Wen-Xuan Dai,
and Hon Ki Tsang∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

I. INTRODUCTION

poorly controlled because of the low awareness and treatment
rate [1], which enhances the development of CVDs and results
in significant burdens on individuals and society. BP variability
(BPV) has been reported to have prognostic value for hypertension [2], and, thus, continuous BP measurement is crucial for
early prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of hypertension and related CVDs. Conventional 24-h ambulatory BP
monitoring can facilitate the monitoring of BPV through measuring BP at regular intervals with auscultatory or oscillometric
approaches. However, it has limitations including the discontinuous nature and the discomfort caused by the repeated cuff
inflations.
Compared with cuff-based BP techniques, pulse transit time
(PTT) method has received much attention over the recent
decades because of its capability to track BP change, as well
as its advantages as a noninvasive, continuous, and most importantly cuffless tool for BP measurement [3]–[5]. PTT is the time
taken by the arterial pulse propagating from the heart to a peripheral site, and can be calculated as the time interval between
the R wave peak of electrocardiogram (ECG) and a characteristic point of photoplethysmogram (PPG). The fundamental
principle of the PTT-based method is based upon the pulse wave
velocity (PWV) recording through the Moens–Korteweg (M–K)
equation

Eh
(1)
PWV =
ρd

LOOD pressure (BP) is an important hemodynamic parameter varying between systolic BP (SBP) to diastolic
BP (DBP) in each heartbeat. High BP, also known as hypertension, is one of the major modifiable risk factors leading to the
development of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs)—the number
one killer in the world. Hypertension is highly prevalent but

which relates PWV with the elastic modulus of vessel wall E,
blood density ρ, and arterial dimension properties, such as vessel
thickness h and arterial diameter d. PWV is inversely related
with PTT, i.e., PWV = K/PTT, where K is the distance between
heart and certain peripheral site; and E can be exponentially
correlated BP through [6]:

Abstract—Pulse transit time (PTT) has attracted much interest
for cuffless blood pressure (BP) measurement. However, its limited
accuracy is one of the main problems preventing its widespread
acceptance. Arterial BP oscillates mainly at high frequency (HF)
because of respiratory activity, and at low frequency (LF) because
of vasomotor tone. Prior studies suggested that PTT can track
BP variation in HF range, but was inadequate to follow the LF
variation, which is probably the main reason for its unsatisfactory
accuracy. This paper presents a new indicator, the photoplethysmogram intensity ratio (PIR), which can be affected by changes in
the arterial diameter, and, thus, trace the LF variation of BP. Spectral analysis of BP, PTT, PIR, and respiratory signal confirmed
that PTT was related to BP in HF at the respiratory frequency,
while PIR was associated with BP in LF range. We, therefore, develop a novel BP estimation algorithm by using both PTT and PIR.
The proposed algorithm was validated on 27 healthy subjects with
continuous Finapres BP as reference. The results showed that the
mean ± standard deviation (SD) for the estimated systolic, diastolic, and mean BP with the proposed method against reference
were −0.37 ± 5.21, −0.08 ± 4.06, −0.18 ± 4.13 mmHg, and
mean absolute difference (MAD) were 4.09, 3.18, 3.18 mmHg, respectively. Furthermore, the proposed method outperformed the
two most cited PTT algorithms for about 2 mmHg in SD and MAD.
These results demonstrated that the proposed BP model using PIR
and PTT can estimate continuous BP with improved accuracy.
Index Terms—Arterial diameter change, cuffless blood pressure, photoplethysmogram intensity ratio (PIR), pulse transit time
(PTT), respiration, vasomotion.

B

E = E0 eγ P
Manuscript received July 10, 2015; revised August 19, 2015; accepted
September 15, 2015. Date of publication September 22, 2015; date of current
version May 19, 2016. This work was supported in part by the Guangdong Innovation Research Team Fund for Low-cost Healthcare Technologies in China,
the External Cooperation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences under
Grant GJHZ1212. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
X.-R. Ding, Y.-T. Zhang, J. Liu, and W.-X. Dai are with the Joint Research
Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Electronic Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong.
∗ H. K. Tsang is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: hktsang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2480679

(2)

where E0 is the elastic modulus at zero pressure; γ is a coefficient depending on particular vessel, and P is BP. Therefore,
PTT can be translated into BP with an initial calibration under
the assumption that h/d keeps constant. PTT-based BP estimation has been extensively studied ever since 2000 [7]–[20],
when Chen et al. [7] estimated SBP using pulse arrival time
with intermittent calibration, and showed that the estimated SBP
was highly correlated with reference SBP (r = 0.97 ± 0.02). In
2005, Poon and Zhang [9] established a model with PTT to
estimate BP with initial calibration, and achieved an accuracy

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DING et al.: CONTINUOUS CUFFLESS BP ESTIMATION USING PTT AND PIR

of 0.6 ± 9.8 and 0.9 ± 5.6 mmHg for SBP and DBP, respectively. Recently, Wibmer et al. [19] investigated the relationship
of PTT and SBP through regression analysis and found a nonlinear approach was better than linear one.
Although PTT has been considered a promising surrogate of
BP and could become the most widely used technique for noninvasive continuous BP monitoring in the future [4], [5], there are
still several problems to be solved before its widespread application. First, some PTT-BP models could only provide one BP
parameter, e.g., exclusively SBP [7], [8], [21], [22], DBP [11], or
mean BP (MBP) [18], but SBP, DBP, and MBP all have clinical
significance. Second, a calibration procedure is required to map
PTT to BP. However, recalibration at intermittent intervals is often necessary for accurate estimation, potentially owing to the
inadequacy of PTT to track BP variation over a long period. Last
and most importantly, the accuracy of PTT-based BP estimation
is unsatisfactory. The possible reasons are the influences of the
vascular or vasomotor tone and the preejection period (PEP)
[3]. Regarding PEP issue, impedance cardiogram, phonocardiogram [20], ballistocardiogram, or two peripheral PPG have
been adopted to eliminate the effect of PEP. Nonetheless, several
studies indicated that PTT with PEP included actually performs
better for BP estimation than that with PEP removed, which
demonstrates the positive effect of PEP on BP estimation [8],
[22], [23]. For the vasomotor tone, previous research has examined its influence on BP-PTT relationship [24], and central
PPG instead of peripheral PPG was suggested to alleviate such
effect [18]. However, few studies have attempted to take this
factor into account in the PTT-BP estimation model to improve
the accuracy.
BP is dynamic and its rhythmic oscillations can be identified
with the appearance in its spectrum as individual peaks, which
reflect: 1) the oscillations with a frequency typically between 0.2
and 0.35 Hz, a frequency similar to that of normal respiratory
activity, defined as high frequency (HF); 2) oscillations with a
frequency of approximately 0.1–0.15 Hz, suggesting the sympathetic modulation of vasomotor tone, defined as low frequency
(LF) [25]–[27]. According to our prior research work [28], [29],
PTT could track BP in HF range, but was inadequate to follow
LF variations in BP. This is probably the most important reason for the inaccuracy of estimated BP with only the PTT and
the requirement of intermittent calibration to maintain accuracy.
However, to date, few studies have addressed the LF component
in cuffless BP estimation. Here, we propose a new indicator, the
PPG intensity ratio (PIR) [30], that can reflect changes in the
arterial diameter, and thereby the arterial vasomotion, and, thus,
allow tracking of BP in the LF range. Furthermore, we develop
a novel BP estimation algorithm which employs both the PIR
and the PTT to improve the estimation accuracy.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. PTT and PIR
Fig. 1 illustrates the diagram of PTT and PIR calculation,
where PTT is determined as the time interval between the R
wave peak of ECG and the peak of first derivative of PPG in the
same cardiac cycle, and PIR is the ratio of PPG peak intensity IH

965

Fig. 1. Diagram of PTT and PIR calculation, where IH indicates PPG peak
intensity, IL the valley intensity, and 1st dPPG is the first derivative of PPG.

to PPG valley intensity IL of one cardiac cycle. Our earlier study
shows that PIR can theoretically reflect the arterial diameter
change Δd during one cardiac cycle from systole to diastole,
and PIR is exponentially linked with Δd through the following
expression [30]:
PIR = eα ·Δ d

(3)

where α is considered to be a constant related to the optical
absorption coefficients in the light path.
From a physiological perspective, BP is mainly affected by
four factors: arterial compliance, cardiac output, peripheral resistance, and blood volume [31]. Arterial compliance can be
evaluated by PTT, since PTT is an index of arterial stiffness
[32]. Also, cardiac output can be related to PTT through heart
rate. With regard to peripheral resistance and blood volume, one
of the primary sources is the arterial diameter change which can
be assessed by PIR as described above. Accordingly, PTT and
PIR can capture BP variations indirectly, and be used for BP
estimation.
B. Model-Based BP Estimation With PTT and PIR
Arterial BP is a hemodynamic parameter that fluctuates on
a beat-to-beat basis as a result of the dynamic interplay involving vasomotion, arterial mechanisms, and neural regulation
[33]. Beat-to-beat BP fluctuations are usually attributed to two
rhythmic events: respiration and vasomotion [34]–[36]. The respiratory rhythm is a HF spectral component that occurs in BPV,
and also considered to be a marker of vagal modulation, whereas
the slow oscillation, corresponding to the vasomotor waves, is
a LF component that is present in BPV, and is also a marker of
sympathetic modulation.
Physiological study of BPV showed that both the slow variability and fast variability can be observed in SBP, while the
DBP exhibits only on the slow variability [37]. Since SBP is
the summation of pulse pressure (PP) and DBP, it is hypothesized that the HF component is mainly dominant in PP. Furthermore, PTT and PIR have been investigated to reflect HF and LF

966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Therefore, DBP can be derived with calibrated DBP0 and
PIR0
PIR0
(11)
PIR
3) SBP Estimation With PP and DBP: SBP is the sum of PP
and DBP. Thereupon, beat-to-beat SBP can be estimated with
the addition of (7) and (11):

2
PTT0
PIR0
SBP = DBP0 ·
+ PP0 ·
(12)
PIR
PTT
DBP = DBP0 ·

Fig. 2.

Two-element Windkessel [39].

component in BPV [30], respectively. It is, therefore, speculated
that PP and DBP can be derived from PTT and PIR, respectively,
and, consequently, the SBP can be estimated accurately.
1) PP Estimation With PTT Based on M–K Equation: In the
M–K equation (1), the elastic modulus E is given by [38]:


ΔP 2 1 − σ 2 RO R2i
·
(4)
E=
ΔRO
R2O − R2i
where RO is the external radius, ΔRO is the external radius
change in response of the pressure change ΔP, and ΔP is the
PP in the artery; Ri is the internal radius, and σ is the Poisson’s
ratio. PWV is reversely proportional to PTT
PWV ∝

1
PTT

(5)

Since the artery radius change is quite small compared with
elastic modulus change, it is assumed to be constant. According
to (1) and (4), (5), PP has a relationship with PTT as follows
PP ∝

1
PTT2

(6)

With initial calibrated PP0 and PTT0 , PP can be derived in
terms of measured PTT

2
PTT0
(7)
PP = PP0 ·
PTT
2) DBP Estimation With PIR Based on the Windkessel Model:
Two-element Windkessel model, originally proposed by Frank,
consists of peripheral resistance R and arterial compliance C
[39], as shown in Fig. 2.
In a “pure” Windkessel, the DBP can be theoretically expressed in terms of RC using the following equation:
DBP = P0 · e−t/R C

(8)

where P0 is the end-systolic aortic pressure. Since C is constant
in a relatively short period, DBP mainly varies with R. Noting
that the major regulator of peripheral vascular resistance is the
vessel diameter, R will mainly rely on the arterial diameter
change Δd. As mentioned above in (3), Δd is related with PIR
as follows:
1
= e−α ·Δ d
PIR

(9)

and Δd is inversely related to R. Thus, DBP depends on the
reciprocal of PIR
DBP ∝

1
PIR

(10)

C. Experimental Details
To validate the proposed BP estimation using both PTT and
PIR as given by (11) and (12), an experiment was conducted on
27 healthy adults (14 males) with mean age of 25.6 ± 2.1 years
(range 21–29 years), who were nonsmokers with no history
of CVDs. Reference BP was measured by Finapres (Finapres
Medical System), a noninvasive continuous BP measurement
system, with the finger cuff on the left thumb, and brachial cuff
on the left upper arm. ECG and PPG were acquired with one-lead
ECG electrodes placed on left and right arms, and PPG sensor on
left index finger, respectively. Synchronous respiratory activity
continuously monitored by recording the chest movement with
respiratory monitoring belt (Vernier Software & Technology).
All tests were performed with subjects in the seated position,
and the signals were recorded at the sampling rate of 1000 Hz
for 5 min. All the subjects gave their informed consent prior
to the experiments, in accordance with the guidelines of the
Institutional Research Ethics Board.
D. Signal Processing and Data Analysis
In order to verify the capability of PTT to track the HF component of SBP as well as respiratory activity, and PIR to reflect
LF fluctuations of BP, the power spectrum analysis of SBP,
DBP, PP, respiratory signal, PTT, and PIR were conducted in
0–0.5 Hz frequency range based on the Lomb–Scargle periodogram method [40]. Difference mean and standard deviation
(SD), as well as mean absolute difference (MAD) between estimated BP with the proposed method and reference BP were
used as the evaluation metrics. The agreement between reference BP and estimated BP with the proposed method were
analyzed according to the Bland–Altman approach [41], with
the agreement limits defined by mean ±1.96 × SD. In addition,
the proposed method was compared with two most cited PTTbased algorithms [7], [9] for cuffless BP estimation. Statistical
significance was estimated using Student’s t-test. P < 0.05 is
regarded as statistically significant.
III. RESULTS
A. Spectral Analysis of BP, Respiratory Signal, PTT, and PIR
As can be seen in Fig. 3(a), slow variability and fast variability
can be observed in a typical continuous BP signal. Correspondingly, the variations of SBP, DBP, and PP are shown in Fig. 3(b).
Obviously, SBP contained both slow variation and fast variation, whereas the DBP only showed slow variability, with PP

DING et al.: CONTINUOUS CUFFLESS BP ESTIMATION USING PTT AND PIR

Fig. 3. (a) Continuous BP signal, (b) beat-to-beat SBP, DBP and PP of a
representative subject, with corresponding PSD of (c) SBP, (d) DBP, and (e) PP.

967

Fig. 5. Typical time series and corresponding PSD of (a), (b) DBP and (c),
(d) PIR of a representative subject.

be caused by the respiratory activity, as discussed in the next
section.
Example recordings of DBP and PIR and their power spectra
are shown in Fig. 5. The variation of DBP is slower compared
with PP, with its frequency range concentrated at approximately
0.1 Hz. It can be seen from Fig. 5(a) and (c) that the amplitude
of DBP is inversely related with that of PIR on the whole, and
they have the similar spectral components. This is in line with
preliminary study about PIR which demonstrated PIR could
potentially evaluate the LF modulation of BP, but it is worth
noting that there is also minor HF component appeared in PIR
spectrum.
B. Performance of the Proposed BP Model With PTT and PIR

Fig. 4. Time series and corresponding PSD of (a), (b) PP, (c), (d) PTT, and
(e), (f) respiratory signal of a representative subject.

presented the fast variability. Power spectral density (PSD) of
SBP, DBP, and PP as illustrated in Fig. 3(c)–(e) can further describe this, where SBP showed LF variation centered at around
0.1 Hz, with HF variation dominated between 0.2–0.3 Hz; and
the LF spectrum components were more pronounced in DBP,
while PP mainly contained the HF variation. This is consistent
with previous study about BP variation.
Furthermore, time series of PP, PTT, and respiratory signal
with their corresponding spectrums are presented in Fig. 4. As
can be observed from Fig. 4(a), (c), and (e), they have a similar
variation pattern with almost the same frequency components
at 0.2–0.3 Hz. Moreover, from the PSD curves, the respirationsynchronous variation is seen as peaks at the respiratory frequency of PP spectrum, as well as in PTT. This indicates that
the HF component of PP can be reflected by PTT, which might

The estimation results of the proposed BP model were compared with the continuous Finapres BP as the reference with
regard to correlation and agreement. The correlation and the
Bland–Altman plot of the SBP, DBP, and MBP estimation for
our proposed method versus Finapres BP are given in Fig. 6.
The Person’s correlation coefficient between overall estimated
SBP, DBP, and MBP and that of Finapres is 0.91, 0.88, and
0.89, respectively. For the Bland–Altman plot, the x-axis of the
plots presents the average of the estimation with the proposed
algorithm and the Finapres, while the y-axis shows the difference between the two methods. The bias (mean) and the limits of
agreement (bias ±1.96 × SD) are illustrated in red solid line and
black dash dot lines, respectively. It is observed that the majority
of the points lie within the limit of agreement, indicating that the
estimated BP with the proposed method is in close agreement
with those made by Finapres. The bias for SBP, DBP, and MBP
estimates are −0.37, −0.08, and −0.18 mmHg, respectively.
C. Comparison of the Proposed Model Against Current
PTT Algorithms
To further evaluate the efficiency of the proposed method,
we compared the proposed method with two of the most cited

968

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Correlation and Bland–Altman plots of (a), (d) SBP, (b), (e) DBP, and (c), (f) MBP with the reference of Finapres BP.

PTT algorithms in the cuffless BP estimation area [7], [9]. The
first PTT algorithm [7] estimates SBP in terms of relative PTT
change through the following equation:
SBP = SBP0 −

2
(PTT − PTT0 )
γPTT0

(13)

and the second PTT algorithm [9] can obtain SBP and DBP
based on the following equation set
DBP = MBP0 +

2 PTT0
ln
γ PTT



2
PTT0
(14a)
PTT

2
PTT0
(14b)
SBP = DBP + (SBP0 − DBP0 ) ·
PTT
−

1
(SBP0 − DBP0 ) ·
3

Fig. 7 shows a representative example from the subjects of
the beat-to-beat Finapres SBP, estimated SBP by proposed algorithm with PTT and PIR, compared to those by PTT algorithms,
where SBP_PTT (1) represents the first PTT algorithm, and
SBP_PTT (2) the second PTT algorithm. We can see that estimated SBP with proposed method tracked better with Finapres

SBP compared with those of PTT methods. For this dataset with
66 beat-to-beat SBP, the beat by beat variation can be observed,
and the average value measured by Finapres was 115.19 ±
4.87 mmHg, and the estimated values by proposed method, first
and second PTT methods were 115.79 ± 4.82, 113.34 ± 3.65,
and 120.76 ± 7.73 mmHg, respectively. The corresponding errors were 0.59 ± 3.10, −1.83 ± 4.06, and 5.56 ± 5.90 mmHg,
respectively, which further reveals that the SBP estimated with
our method shows better correlation with Finapres SBP than the
control PTT algorithms.
Since the first PTT method only contains the algorithm for
SBP estimation, DBP and MBP estimation were only compared with those of the second PTT method. It can be seen
from Fig. 8 that DBP varied slower than SBP, where the average Finapres value was 73.25 ± 2.98 mmHg. The estimated
DBP with proposed method and PTT method were 71.98 ± 2.03
and 79.38 ± 4.02 mmHg, respectively, with the corresponding
errors −1.27 ± 2.11 and 6.13 ± 5.23 mmHg. Obviously, the estimation with the PTT method overestimated DBP not only in
terms of the average level but the variability.
The variation of MBP is also slow which is similar to that of
DBP, with average value of 87.23 ± 3.20 mmHg, as depicted

DING et al.: CONTINUOUS CUFFLESS BP ESTIMATION USING PTT AND PIR

Fig. 7. Estimated beat-to-beat SBP with proposed method (green) and PTT
algorithms (solid blue and dash blue) with the reference of Finapres SBP (red)
(a) and the estimated errors (b) of one representative subject.

969

Fig. 9. Estimated beat-to-beat MBP with the proposed method (green) and
PTT algorithm (dash blue) with the reference of Finapres MBP (red) (a) and the
estimated errors (b) of one representative subject.

TABLE I
ACCURACY, PRECISION, AND AGREEMENT BETWEEN FINAPRES BP AND
ESTIMATED BP WITH PTT, AND THAT WITH PTT AND PIR

Mean (mmHg)

SD (mmHg)

MAD (mmHg)

∗
†

Fig. 8. Estimated beat-to-beat DBP with the proposed method (green) and
PTT algorithm (dash blue) with the reference of Finapres DBP (red) (a) and the
estimated errors (b) of one representative subject.

in Fig. 9. The estimated MBP with proposed method and the
PTT method were 85.78 ± 2.32 and 93.18 ± 5.26 mmHg, with
corresponding estimation error of −1.45 ± 2.27 and 5.94 ±
5.37 mmHg, respectively, suggesting that the estimation with
the proposed method correlates better with Finapres MBP than
that of the PTT method.
Furthermore, the overall performance was analyzed in terms
of difference mean, SD, and MAD. Difference mean is a measure of the bias of BP estimates, while difference SD is a measure

SBP
DBP
MBP
SBP
DBP
MBP
SBP
DBP
MBP

PTT Method (1) [7]

PTT Method (2) [9]

Proposed Method

0.19
N/A
N/A
6.21
N/A
N/A
4.94
N/A
N/A

−0.11
0.19
0.09
7.31
6.03
6.25
5.76
4.80
4.96

−0.37
−0.08
−0.18
5.21∗†
4.06†
4.13†
4.09∗†
3.18†
3.18†

Statistically significant at the level 0.05 compared with the PTT method (1).
Statistically significant at the level 0.05 compared with the PTT method (2).

of error variability. MAD is a measure of overall accuracy in estimating BP. The smaller MAD, the better overall performance.
Table I summarizes the values of mean, SD, and MAD for our
proposed BP estimation method and the PTT methods tested
on 27 subjects, including 1713 heart beats. It is observed that
the difference mean of our proposed method in estimating SBP,
DBP, and MBP is within −0.37, −0.08, and −0.18 mmHg of
the Finapres, respectively; the difference SD of the proposed
method in estimating SBP, DBP, and MBP is within 5.21, 4.06,
and 4.13 mmHg of the Finapres, respectively; and the MAD of
the proposed method in estimating SBP, DBP, and MBP is within
4.09, 3.18, and 3.18 mmHg of the Finapres, respectively. Comparing with the PTT methods, it is evident that our proposed
method in estimating SBP, DBP, and MAP achieves smaller
difference mean, SD, as well as MAD, and the difference is
significant, indicating a better accuracy.

970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we proposed a new indicator, the PIR that can
reflect the arterial diameter change, to trace the LF variation of
BP, and established a novel BP model with the combination of
PIR and PTT. We found that the beat-to-beat BP contained both
the HF and LF variation components, where the HF component
was dominant in PP and similar to that of PTT as well as respiratory signal, while the LF range was primarily in DBP and was
also coupled with the PIR. The PTT and PIR were, therefore,
adopted to estimated PP and DBP, respectively, and SBP can
be obtained accordingly. The preliminary results on 27 healthy
subjects demonstrated the feasibility of using both PTT and PIR
to enhance the accuracy of PTT-based BP estimation.
A. Effect of Respiration and Vasomotor Tone on BP
It has been long recognized that arterial BP fluctuates on a
beat-to-beat basis, and the application of spectral techniques to
continuous BP has revealed the presence of spontaneous fluctuations including the oscillations at the HF range similar to
respiratory frequency, and vasomotion waves in the LF range
slower than the respiratory frequency [35], [36]. Power spectral
analysis of SBP in this study was consistent with this, i.e., SBP
spectrum contained both the HF peak at around 0.25 Hz, which
was coupled with the respiratory frequency, and the LF peaks
focused at approximately 0.1 Hz.
Previous investigations demonstrated that the HF component
oscillation in BP is related to the respiratory activity [42]. The
underlying mechanisms of the fluctuation of BP with respiration
is probably due to the intrathoracic pressure change with breathing which has a mechanical effect on venous return, pulmonary
vascular, and aortic pressure, thereby, leading to the cyclic variation in BP. Several researchers have found that the modulation
of this HF component for SBP spectrum was linearly related to
the respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), indicating that respiratory fluctuations in BP was attributable to RSA [43]. Moreover,
Drinnan et al. [44] quantified the relation between heart rate
and PTT through paced respiration, and found that there was a
strong relationship between PTT and heart rate interval. Johansson et al. [45] confirmed that PTT varied in pace with respiration
and detected the respiration rate reliably from PTT. The result
of this study about the coupled frequency between PTT and respiratory signal further verified this. Besides, PTT has been used
as a measure of respiratory effort [46], because PTT is inversely
proportional to BP, and BP falls with inspiration with the rise
in PTT. This can also be observed from time series of PP, PTT,
and respiratory signal as depicted in Fig. 4. With these considerations, we, thus, reasoned that PTT could reflect the effect of
respiration activity on BP, and can be used to estimate the HF
component of BP variation, particularly PP.
On the other hand, the LF component of BP is associated with
vasomotion waves that result from an oscillation of the sympathetic vasomotor tone. Except for the respiratory synchronous
oscillations in BP, the vasomotor tone is also an essential determinant of BP. A number of investigators evidenced that the
oscillations of vasomotor tone are caused by local changes in
smooth muscle constriction and dilation through the modulation

of the sympathetic nervous activity [35], [36]. Though the underlying mechanism has remained elusive, the fluctuations in
vasomotor tone are considered to relate to the local adjustment
of peripheral resistance to regulate the blood flow thus to meet
the local metabolic demand. The adjustment of the peripheral
resistance is mainly determined by the arterial diameter change,
which is the result of the variations in the tension exerted by the
smooth muscle in the vessel walls [47]. In other words, the arterial diameter change might be the primary factor that affects the
vasomotor tone. PIR is related to the arterial diameter change,
and, thus, is hypothesized to reflect the vasomotor tone and further the LF oscillations in BP. The spectrum of PIR and BP in
this study could explain the hypothesis, which is also consistent
with earlier reported results. Our previous study analyzed the relationship between PIR and BP under the influence of autonomic
nervous activities, such as deep breathing, Valsalva maneuver,
and sustained handgrip, and showed that increase level of BP
was associated with a shift of PIR spectral power toward the
LF component, suggesting the capability of PIR to evaluate the
modulation of sympathetic nervous activity on BP [30]. In addition, Nitzan et al. [48] used a similar indicator, the relative
amplitude variability of PPG signal, to evaluate autonomic nervous system, and claimed that the variation of PPG baseline and
amplitude were mainly concentrated in the LF range, implying
the influence of the sympathetic nervous activity.
B. PTT Methods for BP Estimation
PTT has been extensively studied for continuous BP estimation without a cuff. Despite of its theoretical feasibility, the
PTT-based BP measurement method has not been widely applied clinically because of several existed problems; particularly,
the accuracy issue remains the overarching challenge facing researchers. Prior studies have reported that PTT mainly presents
the HF component variation of BP, but is inadequate to follow
the LF variation [28], [29], which we hypothesize to be the
utmost reason leading to the unsatisfactory accuracy of most
current PTT-based BP measurement approaches.
Continuous BP could be accurately tracked if the noninvasive physiological parameters used for cuffless BP estimation
can not only follow the HF respiratory influence on BP, but
also its LF oscillation due to the sympathetic modulation of
vasomotor tone. McCarthy et al. [17] examined two popular
PTT-BP algorithms, which are also used in this study as contrast methods, and found that neither these two algorithms could
provide reliable BP estimations over a long period. The reason
for Chen’s method with acceptable accuracy with intermittent
calibration is probably due to the combination of LF variation of
cuff-based BP with HF variation of PTT. Without the intermittent calibration, the estimation accuracy of SBP was reported to
deteriorate from 0.64 ± 1.55 to −3.42 ± 29.22 mmHg within
10 min. As for Poon’s method, the accuracy remained relatively
stable, from 1.79 ± 10.50 to 1.24 ± 9.74 mmHg within 10 min.
The larger SD after the initial calibration was potentially attributed to the HF variation of PTT for DBP estimation, as can
be seen in Fig. 8(a). However, DBP varies mainly in LF range, as
shown in Fig. 5(b). As a result, the accuracy of SBP estimation

DING et al.: CONTINUOUS CUFFLESS BP ESTIMATION USING PTT AND PIR

was decreased, because SBP was derived from DBP and PP.
Besides, most of PTT-based approaches estimated BP with PTT
through linear or nonlinear regression method, mostly for SBP
estimation, rather than theoretical model based on physiological
significance, and DBP has been reported to correlate less with
PTT than SBP, which is probably a consequence of the smaller
range of variations in DBP as found in those studies [10], [12],
[16], [19].
Investigation by Liu et al. [24] about the relationship between
PTT and BP during exercise and recovery revealed the influence
of the vascular smooth muscle tone on BP-PTT relationship,
suggesting that the vascular tone should be considered into PTTbased BP estimation. Nevertheless, few studies have attempted
to take account this factor into the PTT-based BP model to
enhance the accuracy. The strengths of this study, compared
with previous studies of PTT-based cuffless BP methods, are
the introduction of a novel indicator to evaluate the LF variation
of BP, and its combination with PTT to estimate BP to achieve
more accurate estimations. With the LF and HF of BP evaluated
by PIR and PTT, continuous BP is supposed to be predicted
accurately without frequent calibration. Moreover, despite of
SBP, estimations of DBP and MBP have also been achieved
with acceptable accuracy.
C. Limitations
There are some limitations in this study. One concern is that
we validated our proposed method with Finapres monitor as
the reference, while the gold standard for continuous BP measurement should be the invasive intraarterial method. Second,
the beat-to-beat estimation with the proposed method and PTT
methods were only within a short period of time. The estimation
with long-term period should be further validated. Third, though
the effects of breathing pattern on the respiratory component of
SBP spectrum have already been analyzed in previous study
[49], the pattern on PTT should be further investigated. Furthermore, the utilization of PIR to assess the vasomotor tone on BP
should be further validated with more experiments. Finally, the
proposed method was tested on 27 healthy subjects, where the
sample size is not large enough and subjects with CVDs were
not included.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In summary, we have presented a new model for BP estimation using PTT and PIR, and validated the model experimentally.
We obtained more accurate results for the cuffless BP estimation
by using both PTT and the new indicator, the PIR. By means
of one-point calibration, the beat-to-beat SBP, DBP and MBP
can be calculated. We found that PIR can indicate the LF variation of BP, whereas PTT reflects the HF fluctuations of BP.
In addition, a novel BP model was established with the combination of PIR and PTT, which outperformed the compared
PTT-based methods in terms of accuracy on 27 subjects. Most
notably, this is the first study to our knowledge to consider the
use of PIR to estimate the influence of vasomotor tone on BP.
Our results provide evidence for BP variations in both the LF
and the HF range where PTT can mainly reflect HF component,

971

and indicates that LF component of BP should be considered
to improve the estimation accuracy. Although the pilot study
offers a potential method for estimating cuffless BP with better
accuracy, it should be further validated with larger sample following with corresponding standard requirement, for example,
the IEEE 1708 standard for wearable cuffless BP measuring devices. With better accuracy, we expect this method to provide
insight for cuffless BP estimation technique. Moreover, through
continuous monitoring BP in an unobtrusive way with an acceptable accuracy permits better prevention and management
of hypertension, thus, reducing the global burden generated by
CVDs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the student volunteers from
the Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong for their participation in the experiment,
and Dr. W. Karlen from the Mobile Health Systems Laboratory,
ETH Zurich, for kindly helping to revise this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] C. K. Chow et al., “Prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of
hypertension in rural and urban communities in high-, middle-, and lowincome countries,” JAMA, vol. 310, pp. 959–968, 2013.
[2] G. Parati et al., “Assessment and management of blood-pressure variability,” Nature Rev. Cardiol., vol. 10, pp. 143–155, 2013.
[3] D. Buxi et al., “A survey on signals and systems in ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring using pulse transit time,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 36,
pp. R1–R26, 2015.
[4] Y. L. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for health
informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1538–1554,
May 2014.
[5] L. Peter et al., “A review of methods for non-invasive and continuous blood
pressure monitoring: Pulse transit time method is promising?” IRBM,
vol. 35, pp. 271–282, 2014.
[6] D. J. Hughes et al., “Measurements of Young’s modulus of elasticity of
the canine aorta with ultrasound,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 1, pp. 356–367,
1979.
[7] M. W. Chen et al., “Continuous estimation of systolic blood pressure
using the pulse arrival time and intermittent calibration,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 38, pp. 569–574, 2000.
[8] J. Muehlsteff et al., “Cuffless estimation of systolic blood pressure for
short effort bicycle tests: the prominent role of the pre-ejection period,” in
Proc. IEEE 27th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Shanghai, China,
2005, pp. 5088–5092.
[9] C. C. Y. Poon and Y. T. Zhang, “Cuff-less and noninvasive measurements
of arterial blood pressure by pulse transit time,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Shanghai, China, 2006, pp. 5877–5880.
[10] J. S. Kim et al., “Effect of confounding factors on blood pressure estimation using pulse arrival time,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, pp. 615–624,
2008.
[11] Y. Chen et al., “Continuous and noninvasive blood pressure measurement:
A novel modeling methodology of the relationship between blood pressure
and pulse wave velocity,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, pp. 2222–2233,
2009.
[12] M. Y. M. Wong et al., “An evaluation of the cuffless blood pressure
estimation based on pulse transit time technique: A half year study on
normotensive subjects,” Cardiovasc. Eng., vol. 9, pp. 32–38, 2009.
[13] M. Masè et al., “Feasibility of cuff-free measurement of systolic and
diastolic arterial blood pressure,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 44, pp. 201–207,
2011.
[14] H. Gesche et al., “Continuous blood pressure measurement by using the
pulse transit time: Comparison to a cuff-based method,” Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 112, pp. 309–315, 2012.
[15] M. Forouzanfar et al., “Coefficient-free blood pressure estimation based
on pulse transit time-cuff pressure dependence,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1814–1824, Jul. 2013.

972

[16] A. Hennig and A. Patzak, “Continuous blood pressure measurement using
pulse transit time,” Somnologie, vol. 17, pp. 104–110, 2013.
[17] B. McCarthy et al., “An examination of calibration intervals required for
accurately tracking blood pressure using pulse transit time algorithms,” J.
Hum. Hypertens., vol. 27, pp. 744–750, 2013.
[18] J. Sola et al., “Noninvasive and nonocclusive blood pressure estimation via
a chest sensor,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3505–3513,
Dec. 2013.
[19] T. Wibmer et al., “Pulse transit time and blood pressure during cardiopulmonary exercise tests,” Physiol. Res., vol. 63, pp. 287–296, 2014.
[20] V. Chandrasekaran et al., “Cuffless differential blood pressure estimation
using smart phones,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1080–
1089, Apr. 2013.
[21] J. H. Shin et al., “Non-constrained monitoring of systolic blood pressure
on a weighing scale,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30, pp. 679–693, 2009.
[22] M. Y. M. Wong et al., “The effects of pre-ejection period on post-exercise
systolic blood pressure estimation using the pulse arrival time technique,”
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 111, pp. 135–144, 2011.
[23] C. Douniama et al., “Blood pressure tracking capabilities of pulse transit times in different arterial segments: A clinical evaluation,” in Proc.
Comput. Cardiol. Conf., 2009, pp. 201–204.
[24] Q. Liu et al., “Attenuation of systolic blood pressure and pulse transit time
hysteresis during exercise and recovery in cardiovascular patients,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 346–352, Feb. 2014.
[25] A. Malliani et al., “Physiology and clinical implications of variability of
cardiovascular parameters with focus on heart hate and blood-pressure,”
Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 73, pp. C3–C9, Apr. 7, 1994.
[26] A. Malliani et al., “Cardiovascular neural regulation explored in the
frequency-domain,” Circulation, vol. 84, pp. 482–492, Aug. 1991.
[27] G. Parati et al., “Spectral analysis of blood pressure and heart rate variability in evaluating cardiovascular regulation a critical appraisal,” Hypertension, vol. 25, pp. 1276–1286, Jun. 1995.
[28] H. T. Ma and Y. T. Zhang, “Spectral analysis of pulse transit time variability
and its coherence with other cardiovascular variabilities,” in Proc. IEEE
28th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., New York, NY, USA, 2006,
pp. 3958–3961.
[29] Q. Liu et al., “Time-frequency analysis of variabilities of heart rate, systolic blood pressure and pulse transit time before and after exercise using the recursive autoregressive model,” Biomed. Signal Process., vol. 6,
pp. 364–369, Oct. 2011.
[30] X. R. Ding and Y. T. Zhang, “Photoplethysmogram intensity ratio: A
potential indicator for improving the accuracy of PTT-based cuffless blood
pressure estimation,” presented at the IEEE 37th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., Milan, Italy, 2015.
[31] Factors that affect blood pressure. [Online]. Available: http://www.edises.
it/file/minicd/germ002/misc/assignmentfiles/cardiovascular/Fact_Aff_
Blood_Pressure.pdf
[32] Y. L. Zhang et al., “Radial pulse transit time is an index of arterial stiffness,” Hypertens. Res., vol. 34, pp. 884–887, 2011.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

[33] G. Mancia, “Short-and long-term blood pressure variability present and
future,” Hypertension, vol. 60, pp. 512–517, 2012.
[34] J. M. Karemaker and J. Strackee, “Hemodynamic fluctuations and baroreflex sensitivity in humans: A beat-to-beat model,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart.
Circulation Physiol., vol. 253, pp. H680–H689, 1987.
[35] A. Malliani et al., “Cardiovascular neural regulation explored in the frequency domain,” Circulation, vol. 84, pp. 482–492, 1991.
[36] M. Pagani et al., “Low and high frequency components of blood pressure
variability,” Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 783, pp. 10–23, 1996.
[37] R. W. De Boer, “Beat-to-beat blood-pressure fluctuations and heart-rate
variability in man: physiological relationships, analysis techniques and
a simple model,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Physiol., Univ. Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1985.
[38] D. H. Bergel, “The dynamic elastic properties of the arterial wall,” J.
Physiol., vol. 156, pp. 458–469, 1961.
[39] N. Westerhof et al., “The arterial Windkessel,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 47, pp. 131–141, 2009.
[40] T. Ruf, “The Lomb-Scargle periodogram in biological rhythm research:
analysis of incomplete and unequally spaced time-series,” Biol. Rhythm
Res., vol. 30, pp. 178–201, 1999.
[41] J. M. Bland and D. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 327,
pp. 307–310, 1986.
[42] A. C. Dornhorst et al., “Respiratory variations in blood pressure,” Circulation, vol. 6, pp. 553–558, 1952.
[43] J. A. Taylor and D. L. Eckberg, “Fundamental relations between shortterm RR interval and arterial pressure oscillations in humans,” Circulation,
vol. 93, pp. 1527–1532, Apr. 15, 1996.
[44] M. J. Drinnan et al., “Relation between heart rate and pulse transit time
during paced respiration,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 22, pp. 425–432, Aug.
2001.
[45] A. Johansson et al., “Pulse wave transit time for monitoring respiration
rate,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 44, pp. 471–478, 2006.
[46] O. Contal et al., “Pulse transit time as a measure of respiratory effort under
noninvasive ventilation,” Eur. Respir. J., vol. 41, pp. 346–353, Feb. 2013.
[47] L. H. Peterson, “Regulation of blood vessels,” Circulation, vol. 21,
pp. 749–759, 1960.
[48] M. Nitzan et al., “The variability of the photoplethysmographic signal—
A potential method for the evaluation of the autonomic nervous system,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 19, pp. 93–102, 1998.
[49] D. Laude et al., “Spectral-analysis of systolic blood-pressure and heartrate oscillations related to respiration,” Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol.,
vol. 22, pp. 352–357, May 1995.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

