IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

943

Intestinal Manometry Force Sensor for Robotic
Capsule Endoscopy: An Acute, Multipatient
In vivo Animal and Human Study
Matthew M. Francisco, Benjamin S. Terry, Jonathan A. Schoen, and Mark E. Rentschler∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: Development of a new medical device class generally termed robotic capsule endoscopes (RCE) is currently being
pursued by multiple research groups. These maneuverable devices
will allow minimally invasive diagnosis and treatment of intestinal
pathologies. While the intraluminal pressures related to the migrating motor complex (MMC) are well understood, no previous
study has measured the active contact forces exerted by the human
small bowel wall on a solid, or near solid bolus such as an RCE.
Understanding and quantifying the active contact force are critical
for the advancement of RCE technology. Methods: In this study, the
authors develop a novel manometric contact force sensor for human studies and validate the feasibility of the design, sterilization
method, and minimally invasive surgical procedure in a multianimal study, followed by a multihuman study. Results: Four porcine
tests of the sensor were conducted. The mean porcine myenteric
contact force measured using the new sensor is 1.20 ± 0.08 N·cm−1 .
The mean myenteric contact force recorded for all five human test
subjects is 0.18 ± 0.33 N·cm−1 . Conclusion: This study demonstrates the feasibility of operating an MMC force sensor in a live
human with a minimally invasive surgical technique and presents
force data necessary for RCE design. Significance: This study represents the first known myenteric contact force measurements on
a solid bolus in the human small intestine.
Index Terms—Capsule endoscopy, in vivo, migrating motor complex force sensor (MFS), myenteric contact force, small intestine,
solid bolus.

I. INTRODUCTION
XPLORATION of the small intestine for the diagnosis and
treatment of intraluminal pathologies remains a challenging endeavor. While minimally invasive endoscopic procedures
exist for identification or treatment of pathologies within the
proximal small bowel, access to the distal small bowel requires
more invasive and time consuming endoscopic procedures or
even laparoscopic surgery due to the small bowel’s convoluted
shape and excessive length [1]. To address these challenges,

E

Manuscript received May 14, 2015; revised August 13, 2015; accepted
September 8, 2015. Date of publication September 17, 2015; date of current
version May 19, 2016. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. M. Francisco is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado.
B. S. Terry is with the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering,
University of Nebraska.
J. A. Schoen is with the Department of Surgery, University of Colorado
Hospital.
∗ M. E. Rentschler is with the Department of University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA, and also with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, CO 80010 USA (e-mail: mark.
rentschler@colorado.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2479607

Fig. 1.

MFS with human compatible components.

robotic capsule endoscopes (RCE) are currently in development
by multiple research groups [2]–[5]. This new class of endoscopic device will ideally be capable of navigating the narrow
twists and bends of the small intestine without damaging the lumen. An important environmental factor crucial for the development of RCE technology is the effect of active peristaltic forces
generated by the migrating motor complex (MMC) against the
device. It is essential that the propulsion and anchoring systems
of the RCE should be able to withstand and navigate through
these variable forces. This paper describes the results from the
first active measurement of human peristaltic forces on a solid
bolus in the small bowel.
The research presented in this paper focuses on the design
of a Migrating motor complex Force Sensor (MFS) for human
studies including: 1) device design validation, 2) sterilization, 3)
surgical procedure validation in porcine models, and 4) human
trials. This MFS must fit through a 12-mm trocar port required
for minimally invasive surgical technique and be conducive to
sterilization for human subject use. Thus, the design incorporates custom-fabricated silicone balloons, stainless steel parts,
and a geometry favorable to manipulation with surgical graspers
(see Fig. 1). Validation results from porcine tests are presented,
followed by results from human studies.
A. Theoretical Modeling
The contact force exerted by the small intestine against an
RCE-shaped solid bolus has not previously been experimentally
measured in a human. The nearest estimate of this force derives
from theoretical modeling of intestinal tissue. Early study by
Bertuzzi et al. established a general theoretical model for peristaltic transport of a solid bolus [6]. More recent study by Miftahof et al. focused on the development of theoretical models of
solid bolus transport within the gastrointestinal (GI) tract [7]–
[8]. They estimate axial contact force produced by the intestinal

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

944

wall around a solid nondeformable bolus to vary from 0.15
to 1.9 N·cm−1 .

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

design for human surgery compatibility and builds in part on
the device design in [22]–[24].
II. METHODS

B. Intraluminal Pressure Measurement
Current motility research based on intraluminal pressure measurement utilizes two types of manometry: water perfused and
solid state. In water-perfused manometry, intraluminal pressure
waves are measured by ex vivo pressure transducers through
open-tipped catheters as water is pumped through the catheter
system. This method of measurement is generally less expensive than its solid state counterpart and can simultaneously
record more sites; therefore, improving sensor resolution [9]–
[11]. However, since this method uses a water-filled tube, it is
sensitive to hydrostatic pressure changes.
Solid-state manometry features in vivo pressure transducers
which permit the patient to remain ambulatory during data collection. Data can be gathered continuously over the span of
several days to produce a more accurate profile of the patient’s
motility. Additionally, a faster frequency response is available
for data collection [12]. The major drawback of in vivo pressure
transducers is that they increase the system cost considerably
while decreasing device durability and sterilization ease. In addition, such sensors are trocar port size limited.
The small intestine is difficult to reach through natural orifices using traditional manometry. Therefore, most manometric
motility research works are focused on the esophagus, stomach,
and large intestine. In an exception to this, however, Seidl et al.
used a solid-state manometry array to measure the fasting MMC
motility and postprandial response of the human jejunum and
ileum in ten healthy volunteers. They measured mean MMC
Phase III contraction amplitude to be 3.84 ± 0.1 kPa in the
jejunum [13].

A. Surgical Methods

C. Contact Force Measurement

B. Design Requirements and Modifications

Although the manometric pressures throughout the GI tract
are generally understood, little work has been done to physically measure and understand the forces experienced by an
RCE-shaped solid bolus within the small bowel with the exception of only a few studies [14]–[21]. Terry et al. developed a
novel manometer, force sensor array, and corresponding characterization method that measured force per cm axial length
generated by the MMC in a porcine small intestine [22]–[25].
The sensor featured multiple torus-shaped latex balloons; each
connected to an ex vivo pressure transducer. The corresponding temperature measurements were recorded in each balloon
using a thermocouple and a perfused manometer recorded the
abdominal pressure.
Placing two sensors in a single porcine model, they found a
mean contact force of 1.34 ± 0.14 and 1.18 ± 0.22 N·cm−1 in
the medial and distal regions of the small bowel, respectively
[22]–[23]. As a follow up to their original study, Terry et al.
used the same sensor to measure proximal, middle, and distal
regions of the small intestine in multiple live porcine models
[24]. Their results yielded an average contact force value of 1.9
± 1.0 N·cm−1 with distal force measurements generally larger
than proximal values. The research presented here focuses on

The previous porcine myenteric contact force measurements
were gathered by Terry et al. using an MFS in an open surgical
technique by laparotomy. Changing to a laparoscopic technique
in a human introduced multiple new design requirements. Of
these, the two major constraints were: 1) the MFS needed to fit
through a 12-mm-diameter trocar and allow for the surgeon to
maneuver it in the abdominal cavity with surgical graspers; and
2) the MFS needed to be constructed from biocompatible and
sterilizable materials (e.g., stainless steel, silicone).
Since the redesigned inflated MFS (17 mm diameter) was too
large to fit through the 12-mm diameter trocar, a custom LabVIEW virtual instrument was used to sequentially inflate/deflate
each balloon in the MFS to a user defined value at a user defined rate (typical values are 14 kPa and 1 ml· min−1 ). The
deflated diameter of the redesigned MFS is 11 mm, thus within
the 12-mm-diameter limit. After insertion, the exact volume of
deionized water removed for deflation was added back at the
same rate to reinflate the device. Pressure and temperature were
recorded at 50 Hz using a National Instruments USB-6218 and
9213 data acquisition system (DAQ), respectively. Following
data collection, the same deflation command was used to remove
the MFS from the patient. Inflation and deflation of each balloon

Surgical access to the human small intestine is necessary
for successful implantation and data collection using an MFS.
Therefore, a desirable candidate procedure is one that allows implantation of the MFS into a generally anesthetized patient without requiring any additional incisions other than those which are
necessary for the original procedure. The Laparoscopic Roux
en-Y Gastric Bypass is an excellent candidate procedure for
MFS implantation. During a Roux en-Y Gastric Bypass procedure, the stomach is divided, and a small pouch, which limits
daily caloric intake, is formed while the majority of the stomach
is simultaneously sealed off. A portion of the small intestine
is then divided and sewn to the newly created small stomach
pouch. Prior to reattachment of the duodenum to the jejunum,
the sterilized MFS may be inserted through one of the 12-mm
diameter trocar ports into the jejunum at the Y-junction in the
aboral direction. Once in place, the MFS may gather myenteric
contact force data before it is removed from the patient. By using participants already undergoing gastric bypass surgery, no
extra incisions are required and the participant is already under
general anesthesia. The only impact is an additional 5 min of
data collection time added to the approximately 2 h Roux-en-Y
procedure time.
A similar approach was used for live porcine testing of the
sensor prior to human testing. The MFS was inserted through a
12-mm trocar into the jejunum region of the small intestine of a
generally anesthetized pig. The contact force was then measured
for approximately 5 min before the sensor was removed.

FRANCISCO et al.: INTESTINAL MANOMETRY FORCE SENSOR FOR RCE AN ACUTE, MULTIPATIENT In vivo ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDY

Fig. 2. MFS cross section showing inner hub and gasket used to seal each
balloon.

Fig. 3. MFS resting in its holder. The MFS was also sterilized while in the
holder. The numbers 1–4 are used to reference each balloon. Balloon 1 is nearest
the trailing cap.

were performed by a syringe pump (P/N 736935A, Cavro Scientific Instruments, Inc.). A single thermocouple [T-type, 40 gauge
bare wire butt-welded (COCO-003-BW Omega Engineering)]
was used to measure the intraluminal temperature in order for
the sensor’s pressure measurement to be calibrated.
To provide a location for the surgeon to grasp the MFS while
in vivo, a cap was added to the leading and trailing side of the
MFS (see Fig. 1). The trailing cap enabled the surgeon to safely
grasp the MFS with a laparoscopic instrument while averting
any damage to the delicate balloons. The leading cap allowed
easier entrance into the small bowel.
Biocompatibility was achieved by fabricating balloons with
medical grade silicone (MED 2014, NuSil Technology, LLC.).
Additionally, the central mounting hub and washer for each balloon were constructed from medical grade stainless steel (316
LVM). This same material was used to construct the leading and
trailing caps. Biocompatible, 0.81 mm (inner diameter) polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing was used for inflation. The final
human compatible version of the MFS is presented in Figs. 1–3.
To allow the balloons to fit more easily through the trocar,
stainless steel balloon molds were created with nominal outer
balloon diameter of 17 mm. Each balloon was made by first
dipping a custom stainless steel mold into a silicone dispersion,
then rotating in air for several hours and repeating for a total
of two dips. Following this process, the silicone coated molds
were cured at 150 °C for 2 h.

945

Sterility of the MFS was of chief concern for the human
study. To sterilize the MFS, it was packaged and placed inside
a low-temperature sterilization machine (STERRAD) where it
was exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) gas. The poststerilized MFS successfully maintained balloon pressurization and a
separate ex vivo validation was conducted using the sterilized
device prior to animal and human testing.
Inside the operating room (OR), the MFS was unwrapped by
the surgeon and placed on a sterile table. To maintain a sterile field, 3-m-long PTFE tubing was used. This allowed enough
tubing for the implanted MFS to be connected to its ex vivo pressure transducers and DAQ outside of the sterile field. Increased
tubing length added a potentially time consuming hazard for the
surgeon. To reduce the likelihood of tangled tubing within the
sterile pack, small couplers were employed to keep each individual section of tubing together. A custom holder that protected
the MFS while it was ex vivo was constructed and implemented
to act as a weighted base which prevented the tension developed
by the additional tubing length from inadvertently pulling the
MFS off the sterile table during surgical use (see Fig. 3).
There was a hydrostatic pressure difference between the
height at which the MFS was initially inflated ex vivo (i.e.,
sitting in the holder on the sterile table next to the patient) and
its in vivo height. MFS height was defined as the position of
the MSF centroid between balloons 2 and 3. Previous versions
of the MFS compensated for this Δh by measuring the change
between the height at which the MFS was initially inflated and
its in vivo height. This same principle was applied for height
compensation in the animal and human studies. To avoid sterile
field contamination, an optical laser was utilized to establish the
height of the MFS holder relative to the test subject. The surgeon
then estimated the in vivo height of the sensor and measured the
difference between the in vivo height and the laser point with a
sterile ruler; thus, establishing Δh.
To prevent contamination, perfused manometry could not be
used to measure abdominal pressure. Instead a new technique
was implemented where a small hollow tube connected to an
ex vivo pneumatic pressure sensor (4426-05G, Measurement
Specialties) was inserted through the trocar. The open end of
the tube was suspended in the open space of the CO2 filled
abdominal cavity. Insufflation pressure Pa was then recorded
for the duration of in vivo data collection.
C. MFS Device Characterization
To convert intraluminal contact pressure recorded by the MFS
into myenteric contact force data, each balloon on the MFS was
characterized independently. A custom chamber and mounting
fixture were designed to simulate in vivo conditions as shown
in Fig. 4. An applied force Fc , ambient temperature Ta , and
ambient abdominal pressure Pa provided a known input while
the internal pressure for each balloon Ps served as a measured
output.
Terry et al. showed that radial contact loading was not necessary for MFS characterization [23]. Instead, they used a flat
plate to independently contact each balloon at three distinct locations Lc . The same characterization procedure was applied to

946

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

D. MFS Device Validation

Fig. 4. Characterization chamber and flat plate used for the characterization
of each balloon.

this study with the exception that all balloons were filled with
deionized water rather than air. The applied force Fc tests are
repeated under various temperatures Ta and abdominal pressures Pa at three distinct balloon locations Lc = 1, 2, 3 120°
apart, while the sensor pressure Ps is recorded. Using these
data curves and (1), characterization coefficients c1 − c5 are
generated that are unique to each balloon
Fc = c1 L2c + c2 Lc + c3 ΔPs + c4 ΔPa + c5 ΔTa .

(1)

Each balloon was characterized using the following method:
1) The balloon was mounted in the characterization chamber and
inflated to an internal pressure Ps of 14 kPa for 8 min to allow
viscoelastic relaxation. The duration of 8 min was chosen as the
smallest amount of time required to reach equilibrium—thereby
minimizing operating time for the human study. 2) The chamber temperature Ta was varied at four discrete values between
room temperature and 37 °C while the gage pressure inside the
chamber Pa was varied between 0 and 2 kPa to simulate the
insufflated abdomen. 3) At a rate of 1 mm·s−1 , a flat aluminum
plate attached to a 5 N loadcell (PN 100-090-674, MTS Systems Corporation) was brought into contact with the balloon.
The plate continued to contact the balloon until it was within
2 mm of its rigid central hub after which it was retracted at
the same rate. The plate contacted the balloon three consecutive
times after which the balloon was rotated 120° and then 240° so
the contact cycles could be repeated at those locations. Changing the contact location (0°, 120°, and 240°) was necessary to
account for any variation in wall thickness of the hand-made
balloons. 4) Steps 2 and 3 were repeated until all permutations
of temperature, pressure, and contact location were achieved.
5) The balloon was then left to sit for eight additional minutes
until it was deflated. Balloon pressure, chamber temperature,
chamber pressure, contact location, contact force, and flat plate
displacement were sampled at 50 Hz and recorded using LabVIEW Signal Express software throughout the duration of the
characterization. The data were supplied to (1) and solved for
the characterization coefficients c1 − c5 which were unique to
each balloon.

Out of the data gathered during the characterization procedure, half were used to calculate the characterization coefficients
c1 − c5 while the other half were used to validate those coefficients. As an additional step, a secondary validation procedure
was added to this study while the MFS was in its fully assembled configuration (see Fig. 1). Inflation and deflation of the
MFS balloons were actuated by the syringe pump and LabVIEW
software. The secondary validation procedure is as follows: 1)
The fully assembled MFS was initially inflated to 14 kPa and
left to sit for 8 min. 2) The balloons were deflated for 5 min
to simulate MFS insertion through the trocar and into the small
bowel. 3) The MFS was then reinflated for 8 min during which
a 1 N force (approximating the load in vivo) was placed successively on each balloon in a radial fashion for 1 min/balloon.
The characterization coefficients c1 − c5 were used to calculate
the force placed on each balloon. This was done by calculating
the mean Fc for Lc = 1, Lc = 2, and Lc = 3, given Ps , Pa ,
and Ta .
E. Porcine Studies
The MFS was tested in four different live porcine models
prior to human testing. Each porcine study served as surgical
practice for the human study and allowed the surgeon to give
feedback for successive design iterations. All pigs included in
this study were standard female since their internal anatomy
closely resembles that of a human. Each pig ranged in age
from 6–12 months and weighed 55–60 kg. A bowel preparation
prior to surgery was administered to each pig ensuring that
the small intestine was clear of any material. Starting 48 h
prior to surgery, the pig was fed only water and Jell-O. During
the final 24 h prior to surgery, the pig received water only.
Additionally, fenbendazole (Panacur) which removed intestinal
worms was administered two days prior to surgery. All pigs
were generally anesthetized using ketamine as the anesthetic
agent and xylazine for sedation. Atropine and glycopyrrolate
were avoided because they are known to reduce GI motility.
Following data collection, each pig was humanely euthanized in
accordance with Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC protocol 87912(04)1D) regulations.
The general test procedure for each porcine study was to
inflate the MFS to 14 kPa and let it rest for 8 min. The sensor
was then deflated for 5 min while it was inserted (see Fig. 5)
into the middle region of the porcine small bowel (jejunum).
The MFS was inserted through the trocar port and ultimately
into the jejunum (see Fig. 6) using surgical graspers to grasp the
MFS (see Fig. 1). Following this, all balloons were reinflated
and data were collected for a period of approximately 8 min.
Finally, all balloons were deflated and the sensor was removed
from the abdominal cavity through the 12-mm trocar. The same
procedure was used for both animal and human studies.
F. Human Studies
All research was conducted in accordance with a test protocol
approved by the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus’s Institutional Review Board (COMIRB Protocol 11-0157).

FRANCISCO et al.: INTESTINAL MANOMETRY FORCE SENSOR FOR RCE AN ACUTE, MULTIPATIENT In vivo ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDY

Fig. 5.

947

Insertion of MFS through a 12-mm trocar.

Fig. 7. Full setup used for myenteric contact-force data collection. An expanded view of the in vivo section of the MFS is also visible (inset). Balloon 4
is nearest the leading edge of the sensor while Balloon 1 is nearest the trailing
edge.

Fig. 6. Deflated MFS as it enters the abdominal cavity of a research subject
(upper). Fully implanted and inflated MFS collecting small bowel myenteric
contact force data (lower).

The MFS was implanted in a total of five research participants:
four females and one male ranging from 27 to 69 years of age
with a mean age of 50 years (see Table IV). One day prior to
surgery, each research participant ingested magnesium citrate
and consumed only clear liquids to ensure that the small intestine was clear of any matter. The participants in the first, second,
and fifth studies were anesthetized by desflurane gas while those
included in the third and fourth studies received intravenous (IV)
remifentanil. The remifentanil was stopped 10 min prior to MFS
implantation and resumed after data collection was complete in
an effort to distinguish the effects of remifentanil versus desflurane anesthesia on GI motility. The full OR setup used for
myenteric contact force data collection is displayed in Fig. 7.
III. RESULTS
A. MFS Device Characterization and Validation
The mean R2 from regression testing for the MFS (R2 Fit)
was 0.90 ± 0.07 and the mean R2 from characterization and

Fig. 8. Inflation (Period I), Deflation (Period II), and Re-Inflation (Period
III) of a typical MFS balloon with respect to time. Note the pressure decay
associated with Periods I and III.

validation (R2 Validate) was 0.89 ± 0.07. This validation was
calculated from the benchtop characterization data for each individual balloon. The data analysis method for the additional
validation procedure of the MFS in its fully assembled configuration is presented next. The approach used to evaluate the
porcine validation data was also used to analyze data from human test subjects.
When an MFS balloon is inflated to 14 kPa and left to rest,
it exhibits stress relaxation. The volume of the balloon expands
over time resulting in a gradual decrease in balloon pressure.
The phenomenon can be seen graphically in Fig. 8, Period I.
The decline in balloon pressure from stress relaxation is abrupt
at first, but then becomes linear after several minutes. The stress

948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

TABLE I
PRESSURE STEP RESPONSE COEFFICIENT COMPARISON BETWEEN TWO
PREOPERATIVE TRIALS (TESTS 1–2) AND TWO POSTOPERATIVE TRIALS
(TESTS 3–4)
Test
1
2
3
4
Average

Fig. 9. Side by side comparison of Periods I and III from Fig. 8. Note the
similar pressure decays between the two.

Fig. 10. Typical pressure measurements during calibration/equilibration for
all four MFS balloons. The balloons are inflated for 8 min, deflated for 5 min,
and then reinflated for 8 min. Note the stepped response in Period III.

relaxation is disrupted, however, when the balloon is deflated for
insertion into the human small bowel (see Fig. 8, Period II). The
sensor pressure during the deflated period remains constant since
the pressure sensor valve is closed; protecting it from the vacuum
of deflation. The pressure spikes displayed (points B and C in
Fig. 8) serve as markers and are created by the test administrator
pinching the MFS tubing near the pressure transducer. Once the
balloon is reinflated, the pressure transducer is opened and the
balloon pressure continues to decay (see Fig. 8, Period III). A
nearly identical stress relaxation is observed by comparing the
pressure profile of Period I to that of Period III (see Fig. 9).
This observation serves as the basis for the in vivo data analysis
method.
One final consideration is the effect of the syringe pump on
the reinflated balloon pressure. The result of inflating all four
balloons for 8 min, deflating for 5 min, and then reinflating
for 8 min is shown in Fig. 10. Although the stress relaxation
rates are the same for each balloon between Period III and its

Balloon 1

Balloon 2

Balloon 3

Balloon 4

0.9273
0.9189
0.9107
0.9031
0.9150

0.9956
0.9954
1.0129
1.0090
1.0032

1.0101
0.9893
1.0000
0.9886
0.9970

1.0846
1.0753
1.0753
1.0765
1.0779

corresponding Period I value, the offset of the pressure curve is
different in Period III compared to its initial value in Period I.
After investigating the issue, this stepped response appeared to
originate from the syringe pump itself. One possible explanation is that a small amount of air may enter the system as the
stepper motor contained within the syringe pump cycles through
the multiple ports used in the inflation and deflation process. To
compensate for this, multiple inflation–deflation cycles are performed immediately prior to and following a human study. The
2000th data point on the pressure curve after the initial inflation
data spike and reinflation data spike are compared to measure the
step value. These points are chosen arbitrarily because they are
near the midpoint of data collection. The step response is then
evaluated as the percent difference between those two points.
The percent difference is averaged between two preoperative
and two postoperative inflation–deflation trials in the OR. These
averages represent a constant csy r in g e which is used to predict
the in vivo step response for each balloon. An example of the
constant csy r in g e observed for the syringe pump step response
is shown in Table I.
With these considerations in mind, the porcine validation and
human study data analysis method may be discussed. First, the
initial ex vivo inflation and in vivo portions of the MFS pressure
curves are identified Pin itial and Pin v iv o , respectively. Next,
subtracting the change in pressure due to the in vivo height of
the MFS from Pin v iv o yields Pin v iv o,heig htadj . Multiplying the
average percent difference of the syringe pump step response
csy r in g e by Pin itial produces a tare line Ptar e with the same
pressure decay as the in vivo data. This line represents a reference point of zero MFS contact force
Ptare = csyringe Pinitial .

(2)

Next, subtracting Ptar e from Pin v iv o,heig htadj shows the
change in intraluminal pressure due to contact force ΔPs ,
ΔPs = Ptare − Pinvivo,heightadj .

(3)

Supplying ΔPs into (1) along with Pa , Ta , Lc , and characterization coefficients c1 − c5 defined previously, yields the
conversion of intraluminal pressure to contact force.
The results of the validation are displayed in Table II yielding
a mean absolute error of 0.05 ± 0.15 N. Since a known 1 N
force is applied independently to each balloon, the results are
expressed in terms of force rather than force/unit axial length.
Balloon 2 appears to have a smaller than expected mean force

FRANCISCO et al.: INTESTINAL MANOMETRY FORCE SENSOR FOR RCE AN ACUTE, MULTIPATIENT In vivo ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDY

TABLE II
MEAN CONTACT FORCE RESPONSE FOR A 1 N LOAD PLACED SUCCESSIVELY
ON EACH BALLOON
Balloon
1
2
3
4

Mean Contact Force [N]
1.02 ± 0.02
0.73 ± 0.02
1.01 ± 0.02
1.03 ± 0.02

TABLE III
PORCINE (FOURTH ANIMAL) MYENTERIC CONTACT FORCE PER AXIAL LENGTH
Balloon
1
2
3
4

Contact Force [N·cm−1 ]
1.91 ± 0.08
1.69 ± 0.06
1.76 ± 0.06
1.83 ± 0.13

value because the syringe pump response csy r in g e did not accurately predict the pressure tare line Ptar e .
B. Porcine Studies
Insertion of the MFS into the 12-mm trocar is shown in Fig. 5.
Once inserted into the porcine small bowel (see Fig. 6), the MFS
collected data for approximately 8 min. The average porcine
myenteric contact force was 1.20 ± 0.08 N·cm−1 . Individual
averages for each balloon in the final porcine study are displayed
in Table III.
C. Human Studies
The mean myenteric contact force based on data from all
MFS balloon segments in all five human research participants
is 0.18 ± 0.33 N·cm−1 . The mean contact forces from myenteric contractions per MFS balloon segment for each research
participant are displayed in Table IV. The research participants
in the first, second, and fifth studies received desflurane gas
anesthesia resulting in a mean myenteric contact force of –0.03
± 0.09 N·cm−1 . The observed mean myenteric contact force
for research participants in the third and fourth studies which
received IV remifentanil is 0.50 ± 0.30 N·cm−1 . An example
plot of myenteric contact force versus time for the third study is
displayed in Fig. 11.
The participants that underwent desflurane gas anesthesia
(studies 1, 2, and 5) essentially developed no active contact
forces against the MFS. This was supported by visual observation of the small intestine during in vivo data collection. One
possible reason for the negative force readings may be the uncertainty associated with a small contact force measurement.
Another possible explanation may be from longitudinal muscle
contractions which shorten the small bowel. This could potentially increase the lumen diameter around the MFS and induce
a negative force on a balloon. Participants in studies 3 and 4
showed significant positive contact forces compared to those

949

participants receiving desflurane gas. However, these myenteric
contact force values are smaller than expected; especially when
compared to the porcine studies.
The two major sources of uncertainty with the current MFS
system stem from the in vivo hydrostatic pressure height compensation and syringe pump compensation csy r in g e which are
two correction factors developed in the porcine study used in the
analysis of myenteric contact force data. In short, it is difficult to
accurately pinpoint the exact location on the side of a research
subject’s abdomen that corresponds to the in vivo level of the
MFS. This measurement is necessary due to the effects of hydrostatic pressure arising from the MFS’s water-filled balloons.
Taking this into account, the average uncertainty for the entire
MFS system is approximately ± 0.65 N·cm−1 which indicates
that some of the forces from the human study may be too small
for the MFS to measure. However, this was not anticipated based
on the results from the preceding porcine studies.
In spite of this, the MFS did record a smaller mean myenteric
contact force for research participants anesthetized with desflurane gas anesthesia (mean of −0.03 ± 0.09 N·cm−1 ) than those
using IV remifentanil anesthesia (mean of 0.50 ± 0.30 N·cm−1 ).
A t test at the 95% confidence level confirms a significant difference between these two groups p = 0.04. This finding is
further supported by visual observation of each human study.
Video footage was recorded for the duration of all in vivo MFS
data collection. Little if any peristalsis was visually observed
for the first, second, and fifth studies, however peristalsis was
clearly visualized for the third study. In the fourth study, the
implanted MFS was not clearly visualized because it remained
obscured behind other small bowel tissue for the duration of data
acquisition.
IV. DISCUSSION
The human study results (overall mean 0.18 ± 0.33 N·cm−1 ,
and IV remifentanil mean of 0.50 ± 0.30 N·cm−1 ), while in
the lower range, are consistent with theoretical models. For
instance, models developed by Miftahof et al. estimate forces
in the range of 0.15–1.9 N·cm−1 [7]–[8].
Terry et al. found an average porcine contact force value
of 1.9 ± 1.0 N·cm−1 which is slightly greater than the force
observed in this study with the new MFS (1.20 ± 0.08 N·cm−1 )
[22]–[24]. This may be due to the nominal inflated balloon
diameter of the MFS which is approximately 5 mm less than
the original sensor used by Terry et al. In addition, the porcine
jejunum is approximately 25% smaller in diameter compared
to a human. Thus, a comparatively lower force was expected
during the human study. A larger sensor might detect additional
forces due to the passive stretching of the intestinal lumen, or the
bowel may exert a larger force on a larger bolus. Additionally,
the forces recorded by the MFS were slightly greater for B1 and
B4 which are the trailing and leading balloons on the sensor,
respectively. This motility response may indicate a prolonged
segmental contraction around the sensor. It is intriguing, if this
is the case because segmental contractions are associated with
the postprandial response rather than the expected MMC found
during fasting motility.

950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

TABLE IV
GENDER, AGE, WEIGHT, METHOD OF ANESTHESIA, AND MEAN CONTACT FORCES PER LENGTH FROM MYENTERIC CONTRACTIONS FOR ALL RESEARCH
PARTICIPANTS INCLUDED IN THE HUMAN STUDY

Gender
Age (years)
Weight (kg)
Anesthesia Method

Study 1

Study 2

Study 3

Study 4

Study 5

Female
27
130

Female
35
120

Male
69
125

Female
68
120

Female
53
95

Desflurane Gas

Remifentanil IV

Remifentanil IV

Desflurane gas

Desflurane Gas

Mean Contact Force Per Length
MFS Balloon
1
2
3
4

(N·cm−1 )
0.17 ± 0.02
−0.21 ± 0.03
0.43 ± 0.01
−0.62 ± 0.03

(N·cm−1 )
0.11 ± 0.05
−0.03 ± 0.06
0.64 ± 0.03
−0.43 ± 0.07

(N·cm−1 )
0.47 ± 0.05
0.79 ± 0.05
1.37 ± 0.05
0.21 ± 0.06

(N·cm−1 )
0.98 ± 0.01
−0.72 ± 0.01
0.14 ± 0.01
0.74 ± 0.06

(N·cm−1 )
−0.02 ± 0.04
−0.45 ± 0.03
0.48 ± 0.01
−0.36 ± 0.02

Average Force Per Length

−0.06 ± 0.14

0.07 ± 0.07

0.71 ± 0.05

0.29 ± 0.02

−0.09 ± 0.03

of the RCE under pressure, but also for those devices that rely
on this pressure for anchoring or mobility performance.
While this study is an important first step, future study is
needed to develop a sensor with increased sensitivity (e.g.,
more accurate determination of Δh, mitigating step response
from syringe pump). Additionally, increasing the duration of
data collection will allow an entire MMC cycle to be recorded
and should represent the full range of myenteric contact force
values that can be expected in the human small bowel. Finally,
placing multiple sensors in different regions of the small bowel
is advantageous for elucidating the effects of sensor location on
myenteric contact force.
REFERENCES
Fig. 11. Myenteric contractile response of the human small bowel from a
single MFS with four balloon segments. Balloon 1 is nearest the trailing edge
of the sensor and balloon 4 is nearest the leading edge.

Virtually no myenteric contact force was measured for research participants who underwent desflurane gas anesthesia
(patients 1, 2, and 5) while those given IV remifentanil averaged
0.50 N·cm−1 (patients 3 and 4). This finding appears consistent
with a study conducted by Akkurt et al. which compared the
effects of IV Propofol anesthesia versus desflurane gas anesthesia on human GI motility [26]. They found that patients who
received the IV anesthesia had their first postoperative bowel
movement in less time than those who received the desflurane
gas.

V. CONCLUSION
To the authors’ knowledge, the data presented in this study
provide the first known myenteric contact force measurements
on a solid bolus in the human small intestine. Contact force measurements from this study not only serve as an important design
specification for RCE developers but also quantify the effects
of anesthesia on GI motility. Knowledge of the contact force on
an RCE is critical not only to ensure proper in vivo performance

[1] S. F. Pasha, “Diagnostic yield of deep enteroscopy techniques for smallbowel bleeding and tumors,” Techn. Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 14,
pp. 100–105, 2012.
[2] L. Sliker et al., “Surgical evaluation of a novel tethered robotic capsule endoscope using micro-patterned treads,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 26,
no. 10, pp. 2862–2869, 2012.
[3] E. Buselli et al., “Evaluation of friction enhancement through soft polymer
micro-patterns in active capsule endoscopy,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 21,
no. 10, art. no. 105802 (6 pages), Sep. 2010.
[4] P. Glass et al., “A legged anchoring mechanism for capsule endoscopes
using micropatterned adhesives,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 12, pp. 2759–67, Dec. 2008.
[5] P. Valdastri et al., “Magnetic air capsule robotic system: proof of concept
of a novel approach for painless colonoscopy,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 26,
no. 5, pp. 1238–46, May 2012.
[6] A. Bertuzzi et al., “Peristaltic transport of a solid bolus,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 459–464, 1983.
[7] R. Miftahof and E. Fedotov, “Intestinal propulsion of a solid nondeformable bolus,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 235, no. 1, pp. 57–70, Jul. 2005.
[8] R. Miftahof and N. Akhmadeev, “Dynamics of intestinal propulsion,”
J. Theor. Biol., vol. 246, no. 2, pp. 377–393, May 2007.
[9] R. E. Clouse and A. Staiano, “Topography of normal and high-amplitude
esophageal peristalsis,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 265, pp. G1098–G1107,
1993.
[10] R. E. Clouse et al., “Application of topographical methods to clinical
esophageal manometry,” Amer. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 95, pp. 2720–2730,
2000.
[11] M. Fox et al., “High-resolution manometry predicts the success of oesophageal bolus transport and identifies clinically important abnormalities
not detected by conventional manometry,” J. Neurogastroenterol. Motility,
vol. 16, pp. 533–542, 2004.
[12] O. Liem et al., “Solid-state vs water-perfused catheters to measure colonic
high-amplitude propagating contractions,” J. Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 24, pp. 345-e167, 2012.

FRANCISCO et al.: INTESTINAL MANOMETRY FORCE SENSOR FOR RCE AN ACUTE, MULTIPATIENT In vivo ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDY

[13] H. Seidl et al., “Comparison of small-bowel motility of the human jejunum
and ileum,” J. Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 24, pp. 373–380, 2012.
[14] S. Mortazavi and J. Smart, “An investigation of some factors influencing
the in-vitro assessment of mucoadhesion,” Int. J. Pharmaceutics, vol. 116,
no. 2, pp. 223–230, Mar. 1995.
[15] H. D. Hoeg et al., “Biomechanical modeling of the small intestine as
required for the design and operation of a robotic endoscope,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000, vol. 2,
pp. 1599–1606.
[16] M. Higa et al., “Characterization of the passive mechanical properties of
large intestine.,” Int. J. Appl. Electromagnet. Mech., vol. 25, nos. 1–4,
pp. 595–599, Feb. 2007.
[17] E. O. Macagno and J. Christensen, “Fluid mechanics of the duodenum,”
Annu. Rev. Fluid. Mech., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 139–158, Jan. 1980.
[18] P. Ciarletta et al., “Hyperelastic model of anisotropic fiber reinforcements
within intestinal walls for applications in medical robotics,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1279–1288, Oct. 2009.
[19] V. I. Egorov et al., “Mechanical properties of the human gastrointestinal
tract,” J. Biomech., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1417–1425, Oct. 2002.
[20] C. S. Jørgensen et al., “Small intestine wall distribution of elastic stiffness
measured with 500 mhz scanning acoustic microscopy,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1059–1063, Dec. 2001.
[21] K. D. Wang and G. Z. Yan, “Research on measurement and modeling
of the gastro intestine’s frictional characteristics,” Meas. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 20, no. 1, art. no. 015803 (6 pages), Jan. 2009.
[22] B. S. Terry et al., “Preliminary mechanical characterization of the small
bowel for in vivo robotic mobility,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 133, no. 9,
pp. 091010-1–091010-7, 2011.
[23] B. S. Terry et al., “Characterization and experimental results of a novel
sensor for measuring the contact force from myenteric contractions,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1971–1977, Jul. 2012.
[24] B. S. Terry et al., “Measurements of the contact force from myenteric contractions on a solid bolus,” J. Robot. Surg., vol. 7, pp. 53–57,
2013.
[25] B. S. Terry et al., “Sensor for measuring the contact force from human
myenteric contractions for in vivo robotic capsule endoscope mobility,”
J. Med. Devices, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 030911–030911, 2013.
[26] B. C. Akkurt et al., “Comparison of recovery characteristics, postoperative
nausea and vomiting, and gastrointestinal motility with total intravenous
anesthesia with propofol versus inhalation anesthesia with desflurane for
laparoscopic cholecystectomy: A randomized controlled study,” Current
Therapeutic Res., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 94–103, Apr. 2009.

Matthew M. Francisco received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, in 2008, and the M.S.
degree in mechanical engineering from the University
of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, in 2013.
He is currently an Engineer developing commercial medical devices. Previously, he had been a Research Assistant at the Advanced Medical Technologies Laboratory at the University of Colorado Boulder. His research interests include medical device and
surgical tool design.

951

Benjamin S. Terry received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, in 1997, the M.S. degree in
engineering systems from the Colorado School of
Mines, Golden, CO, USA, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the University
of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA, in 2012.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering,
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA. Following his M.S. thesis work, he spent nine years as a
Research Engineer developing commercial medical devices. His research interests include the areas of biomechanics and modeling of soft tissues, medical
device and surgical tool design, and noninvasive methods for biosensor implantation.
Dr. Terry is a Member of the ASME.
Jonathan A. Schoen received the B.S. degree in biology from Colgate University, Hamilton, NY, USA,
in 1993, the M.A. degree in biomedical sciences
from Touro College, Dix Hills, NY, USA, in 1994,
and the M.D. degree from the Technion Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel, in 1998. His internship,
residency, and fellowship were all at the University
of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO,
USA.
He is currently a Board Certified Surgeon specializing in bariatric surgery and advanced minimally
invasive surgery, including laparoscopic gastrointestinal surgery, and general
surgery at the University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, CO, USA. His research
interests include the mechanisms of weight loss after gastric bypass, as well as
developing a unique integrated and structured exercise and fitness plan following surgery, to further improve long-term weight loss and health.
Dr. Schoen is an active Member of the American Society for Bariatric Surgeons and the Society of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons.
Mark E. Rentschler (M’08) received the B.S. degree
in mechanical engineering from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA, in 2001, the M.S. degree
in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, in
2003, where he was a National Defense Science
and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellow, and the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA, in 2006.
He is currently an Assistant Professor, Co-Director
of Design Center Colorado, and the Director of the
Graduate Design Program in mechanical engineering at the University of Colorado, Boulder, USA. He also holds a secondary appointment in the Department
of Surgery, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, USA,
and holds an affiliate position in the Department of Bioengineering, University
of Colorado Denver, Denver, USA. Previously, he had been a Postdoctoral Researcher in the Division of Vascular Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, USA, and Senior Engineer and Director of Operations at Virtual
Incision Corporation, Boston, MA, USA. His research interests include medical
mechatronics and surgical robotic systems design and control.
Dr. Rentschler has performed research at the NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA, and is also a member of ASME.

