1082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Letters
The “Fingerprint” of Cancer Extends Beyond Solid Tumor Boundaries:
Assessment With a Novel Ultrasound Imaging Approach
Sneha R. Rao† , Sarah E. Shelton† , Student Member, IEEE, and Paul A. Dayton∗ , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Goal: Abnormalities of microvascular morphology have been
associated with tumor angiogenesis for more than a decade, and are believed to be intimately related to both tumor malignancy and response
to treatment. However, the study of these vascular changes in-vivo has
been challenged due to the lack of imaging approaches which can assess
the microvasculature in 3-D volumes noninvasively. Here, we use contrastenhanced “acoustic angiography” ultrasound imaging to observe and quantify heterogeneity in vascular morphology around solid tumors. Methods:
Acoustic angiography, a recent advance in contrast-enhanced ultrasound
imaging, generates high-resolution microvascular images unlike anything
possible with standard ultrasound imaging techniques. Acoustic angiography images of a genetically engineered mouse breast cancer model were
acquired to develop an image acquisition and processing routine that isolated radially expanding regions of a 3-D image from the tumor boundary
to the edge of the imaging field for assessment of vascular morphology
of tumor and surrounding vessels. Results: Quantitative analysis of vessel tortuosity for the tissue surrounding tumors 3 to 7 mm in diameter
revealed that tortuosity decreased in a region 6 to 10 mm from the tumor
boundary, but was still significantly elevated when compared to control vasculature. Conclusion: Our analysis of angiogenesis-induced changes in the
vasculature outside the tumor margin reveals that the extent of abnormal
tortuosity extends significantly beyond the primary tumor mass. Significance: Visualization of abnormal vascular tortuosity may make acoustic
angiography an invaluable tool for early tumor detection based on quantifying the vascular footprint of small tumors and a sensitive method for
understanding changes in the vascular microenvironment during tumor
progression.
Index Terms—Acoustic angiography, angiogenesis, spatial heterogeneity, tortuosity, ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
COUSTIC angiography is a novel microvascular imaging technique that uses prototype dual-frequency transducer technology to enable noninvasive in vivo imaging of
microbubble contrast agents [1], [2]. Using a low-frequency
transmit element (4 MHz) coupled with a high-frequency receive
element (25 MHz), high-resolution images of vasculature are
generated by isolating the broadband superharmonic microbubble response and eliminating lower frequency tissue response

A

Manuscript received June 23, 2015; revised August 28, 2015; accepted
September 4, 2015. Date of publication September 18, 2015; date of current version May 19, 2016. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health 1R01CA170665 and 1R43CA165621, P30CA16086, and
T32HL069768. † Sneha R. Rao and Sarah E. Shelton contributed equally to
this manuscript. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. R. Rao and S. E. Shelton are with the Joint Department of Biomedical
Engineering at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North
Carolina State University.
∗ P. A. Dayton is with the Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA, and the
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695 USA (e-mail: padayton@
email.unc.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2479590

Fig. 1. (A) 2-D frame of a traditional ultrasound B-mode image in the coronal plane, through the center of a mouse mammary pad tumor delineated by
the white dashed outline. (B) Maximum intensity projection of a 3-D acoustic
angiography image volume containing the tumor and surrounding tissue corresponding to panel A. This comparison illustrates the unique capability of
acoustic angiography to depict in vivo microvasculature.

[3]. This imaging system can resolve blood vessels at scales
not possible with standard ultrasound or conventional contrast
imaging techniques (approximately 100–200 μm in diameter),
and with minimal background signal from tissue [1]. The ability
to image in high resolution, with excellent contrast specificity,
enables resolution of small vessels and segmentation of individual vessels for further morphological analysis. Fig. 1 shows a
conventional ultrasound image in panel A, in comparison with
a maximum-intensity projected image of three-dimensional (3D) acoustic angiography image data showing microvasculature
without tissue background in panel B.
Cancer angiogenesis results in abnormal vascular networks
including characteristically bent and twisted, “tortuous,” blood
vessels, as well as chaotic branching patterns and increased
vessel size, density, and permeability [4]. Recent acoustic
angiography studies have characterized the tortuosity of tumor
vasculature and found it to be significantly higher than that
of control tissue [5], [6]. However, the presence of a tumor
and its effect on the 3-D morphology and spatial variability of
surrounding vasculature has not yet been characterized quantitatively using ultrasound. By combining acoustic angiography
with an image processing technique that isolates concentric regions of a volumetric image dataset with increasing radii, we
are able to systematically analyze the heterogeneity in vascular
structure within a single image volume. This algorithm enabled us to characterize the tortuosity of blood vessels in nearspherical tissue regions including the tumor mass itself and
larger regions encompassing tissue at a distance three to four
times the radius of the tumor region.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

While the gold standard for tissue microvascular analysis,
histology, has shown destabilization of vascular tissue distal to
a tumor mass, this technique is limited in application because
the tissue of interest must be excised, making it difficult to analyze continuously varying spatial relationships in microvasculature [10]. However, imaging techniques such as intravital microscopy enable longitudinal characterization of tumor vascular
morphology at very high resolutions. Previous work in intravital
microscopy has attempted to characterize the heterogeneity of
vasculature surrounding a tumor and identified distinct regions
of tissue directly adjacent to the tumor that exhibit different
vascular morphologies [7], [8]. While intravital imaging has
very high spatial resolution, the tumor tissue must be exposed
through an invasive procedure and the field of view is on the order of 1 mm [9]; thus, limiting the scope of applications to very
small tumor models. Ex vivo studies of tumor angiogenesis have
utilized vessel casting followed by microcomputed tomography
(μCT) or micromagnetic resonance imaging (μMRI) to characterize morphological properties, such as vessel size, vessel
branching, vascular density, and tortuosity [10], [11]. Through
vessel casting and μCT imaging of a carcinoma xenograft tumor
model, the tortuosity of the vessels surrounding the tumor mass
was found to increase as the tumor progressed [10]. Much like
histology, μMRI and μCT vessel imaging require the excision of
the vascular tissue mass and do not allow for longitudinal analysis within the same specimen. Furthermore, the high cost of
μMRI and the potential for radiation exposure when using μCT
limit the utility of these imaging modalities for large studies.
Acoustic angiography offers a noninvasive method for quantitative characterization of vasculature, allowing longitudinal
monitoring of vascular structure within and surrounding a tumor mass. Given this advantage, the combination of acoustic
angiography and the proposed image processing and analysis
technique will be useful in understanding the dynamics of the
tumor environment, observing the effects of a tumor mass on
the proximal and distal tissue vasculature, and monitoring therapeutic tumor response. We hypothesize that by using this novel
technique, we can observe tissue vasculature directly surrounding tumors to be highly tortuous, while the vasculature distal
to the tumor but within the same field of view is expected to
exhibit significantly decreased vessel tortuosity with increasing
distance from the tumor margin.
II. METHODS
A. Image Acquisition
All protocols were approved by the University of North Carolina Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The animal model used for this study was a genetically engineered
C3(1)/Tag mouse model of basal breast cancer that develops
spontaneous tumors in the mammary pad [12]. A modified
Vevo 770 ultrasound scanner (VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada)
was used with a custom dual-frequency transducer for acoustic
angiography imaging [1]. Two sets of images of the inguinal
mammary pads were acquired for each mouse: the conventional
brightness modulated (B-mode) images were obtained using the
high-frequency element, and acoustic angiography images were
acquired using dual-frequency mode by transmitting with the

1083

low-frequency element and receiving with the high-frequency
element. During the acoustic angiography imaging session a
lipid-encapsulated microbubble contrast agent made in-house
similar to DEFINITY (Lantheus Medical Imaging, Inc.) was
infused through a 27 gauge tail-vein catheter at a rate of 1.5
× 108 microbubbles/min, and a 3-D motion stage was utilized
to acquire 2-D images with an interframe step size of 100 μm,
across a distance spanning approximately 3 cm. In order to
assess the effects of a tumor on the surrounding microvasculature, ten acoustic angiography image volumes, each containing
a single tumor between 3 to 7 mm in diameter, were selected
from nine animals. In one animal, a single tumor was present
in both the left and right inguinal mammary pads. Each tumor
was imaged separately for inclusion in this study and was considered independent because the tumors occurred in different
mammary pads and data were acquired in different image volumes. Additionally, ten age-matched healthy littermates without
tumors were selected as controls, yielding 20 image volumes of
abdominal vasculature containing the left and right mammary
pads.
B. Image Processing
Images were resampled using linear interpolation in MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) to create
isotropic voxels within the 25 × 25 × 30 mm (width × depth
× scan length) field of view. A MATLAB analysis routine was
developed to isolate concentric regions with increasing size in
order to quantify vascular tortuosity proximal and distal to a
tumor mass. First the tumor region of interest (ROI) was manually defined across the 3-D image volume using polygonal ROIs
defined in each 2-D plane. The 3-D tumor ROI was dilated using
a spherical structuring element to create multiple binary masks
with increasing size. The masks were then applied to the acoustic angiography image volumes, as depicted in Fig. 2, and image
masks were gradually enlarged by 2 mm in every direction until
the edge of the acoustic angiography image volume was reached.
Manual segmentations are naturally user dependent and potential variability in ROIs could be mitigated by employing more
automated segmentation methods. However, the current method
ensures that tumors are completely contained by the smallest
ROI analyzed by dilating the manually defined ROI by 2 mm
before vessel segmentation. Due to the nature of a maximum
intensity projection image [see Fig. 2(B)], some overlapping
blood vessels may be obscured in the projected image but are
present in the 3-D image data and visible in the segmented vessel
rendering [see Fig. 2(C)].
C. Vessel Segmentation
The vessels in each concentric region were segmented using multiscale ridge regression with manually defined seed
points [13]. In order to account for the tortuosity at the tumor
boundary and to increase the number of vessel samples in the
smallest ROIs, the tumor region was defined as the tumor mass
and 2 mm of surrounding tissue. Each subsequent region of tissue for analysis was formed by increasing the boundary of the
prior region radially by 2 mm. As the ROI grew radially from
the tumor, vessels across regions were concatenated. In control

1084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 2. (A) Standard B-mode image (2-D) in the coronal plane, reconstructed from 3-D image data. Illustration depicts an idealized section of a 3-D tumor
ROI and dilation in all directions to larger ROIs for selection of the concentric tissue regions isolated for vessel segmentation. (B) Acoustic angiography image
(maximum intensity projection of a 3-D image volume) of the tumor and surrounding tissue, with simplified representations of growing ROIs used to mask the
acoustic angiography image volume. (C) Rendering of vessels segmented from each ROI, with representative analysis regions overlaid for explanation. All image
acquisition, ROI selection, and analysis were performed in 3-D. ROI outlines are for illustration purposes.

images, vessels were segmented from the entire image volume
with no preference to vessel location.
D. Tortuosity Analysis
The sum of angles metric (SOAM) measures the total sum
of curvature over the path length of an unbranched vessel segment by measuring the angle between successive trios of points
defining the vessel centerline and normalizing by the path length
[14], resulting in a metric with units of rad/cm. This tortuosity
metric best quantifies vascular morphology of high-frequency
oscillations in the form of tight coils and sinuous curves [14].
In the vessel segmentation process, inaccurate vessel segmentations were occasionally observed visually. These artifacts were
removed from the datasets by calculating the ratio between the
length of the vessel and the distance between vessel endpoints,
and eliminating vessels in which this ratio exceeded 2, a value
determined empirically. The mean SOAM was calculated for
the vessels in each region, and tortuosity for all regions of each
tumor was normalized by subtracting the mean SOAM value
of the tumor ROI. Fig. 3 shows summary plot of normalized
tortuosity versus distance from tumor to illustrate the decrease
in tortuosity associated with distance from the tumor boundary. Segmented vessels were also rendered and color coded by
SOAM tortuosity (see Fig. 4) using custom code integrated with
VesselView (www.tubetk.org).
E. Statistical Analysis
A least-squares linear regression model was applied to the
tortuosity versus distance data for each tumor, and the slope
values were collected in order to assess a correlation between
the tortuosity metric (SOAM) and distance from the tumor. A
two-tailed t-test was performed using the slope dataset to test
significance of the correlation. In order to compare the three
tissue regions (tumor, distal, and control) to each other and determine statistical difference between the groups, ANOVA and
Tukey Honest Significance Difference tests were performed.

Fig. 3. (A) Mean SOAM for distances 2–10 mm from tumor margin and fitted
linear regression model. Tortuosity values were normalized to the tumor region
via subtraction of the mean, and averaged across regions defined by their radial
distance from the tumor boundary. Vessel tortuosity decreases significantly with
increasing distance from the tumor region, with R2 > 0.5 and p = 0.002. (B)
Mean and standard error of SOAM tortuosity values of the tumor, distal, and
control tissue regions. Each group is statistically different from the others based
on ANOVA and Tukey HSD tests, with p < 0.01 for all tests.

These two tests enabled us to statistically observe the heterogeneity in tortuosity values for the vasculature surrounding a
tumor mass and compare these to mean tortuosity values of
control animal vasculature.
III. RESULTS
The largest tissue regions had 217 ± 29 segmented vessels
each, with approximately 40–50 vessels attributed to each 2 mm
increase in ROI size beyond the original tumor ROI. Based
on the t-test analysis, the slopes of the SOAM linear regressions were found to be negative, with p = 0.002. Additionally,
the magnitude of the mean slope for the normalized SOAM,
−0.59 ± 0.34 rad/cm per mm increment away from the tumor,
demonstrated a drastic decrease in tortuosity within the imaging
field. Fig. 4 illustrates this trend by displaying renderings of the
segmented vessels with a color map indicating the SOAM value
for each vessel for an example tumor. The vessels shown in
the most saturated reds indicate the highest tortuosity values and
are visibly localized to the tumor located in the lower portion of

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 4. Color map rendering of the SOAM values for each blood vessel isolated from the acoustic angiography image volume. Intense reds indicate higher
SOAM values which are concentrated in the tumor region, while less intense red
colors indicate lower SOAM values. This image was generated in VesselView
(www.tubetk.org) using custom code provided by Kitware Medical Imaging
(Carrboro, NC, USA).

the image. Less intense reds correspond to lower tortuosity values, and more of these vessels can be seen away from the tumor.
By isolating vessels within the tumor and in distal tissue regions, as well as in control images, we were able to delineate
the tortuosity profiles in these distinct regions. For this analysis, tumor regions included tumors and 2 mm of surrounding
tissue, and distal tissue regions included vasculature between
6 to 10 mm from tumor boundaries. Analysis using ANOVA
and Tukey Honest Significance Difference tests revealed that
the tortuosity values of the three vascular regions were statistically different from each other (p = 2 × 10−16 ), including each
pairing of the three groups [see Fig. 3 (B)]. As expected, the
greatest difference in tortuosity is between the tumor and the
control vessels (23.81 ± 1.79, difference and standard error).
The mean and standard error of the SOAM of the distal tissue
region was 6.41 ± 2.07 lower than that of the tumor region.
However, when compared to the control tissue, the distal tissue
region had 17.40 ± 1.79 higher tortuosity (p = 1 × 10−8 ), indicating that the within the imaging field, the tortuosity decreases
significantly, but does not reach normal tortuosity levels that are
observed in control animals.
IV. DISCUSSION
While changes in vascular structure have been directly linked
to the progression of a tumor in many qualitative histology
studies, only recently have studies characterized the vessel
morphology in a tumor microenvironment using quantitative
imaging modalities, such as contrast enhanced MRI and X-ray
imaging [15]–[17]. Acoustic angiography, a noninvasive and
high-resolution imaging technique, provides near-real-time capabilities for visualizing vascular architecture, as well as the opportunity for further quantitative analysis of morphology, such

1085

as the study described here. This novel contrast-enhanced ultrasound technique has recently been used to show differences
in 3-D vessel morphology between tumor models and controls
[6]. However, it has not yet been used to characterize the spatial dependence of vessel tortuosity with respect to the tumor
mass. The image processing method described in this study
has demonstrated that acoustic angiography is a valuable tool
for detecting decreasing vessel tortuosity within 10 mm of the
tumor boundary, as seen by the negative correlation observed
between tortuosity and distance from the tumor in Fig. 2(A). Although the tortuosity decreased significantly 6 to 10 mm from
the tumor boundary, the surrounding vasculature still exhibited
elevated tortuosity when compared to control tissue; thus, the
vascular footprint of a tumor extends far beyond the immediate
tumor margin. Previous studies analyzing vascular tortuosity
surrounding tumors using other methods have characterized tumor and transitional vessel structure within 1 mm of the tumor
boundary [7], [8]. The data and analysis presented in this letter
have demonstrated that similar vascular profiles can be identified noninvasively using acoustic angiography, and exist at a
scale an order of magnitude larger, across 1 cm of surrounding
tissue.
The vascular maps generated using acoustic angiography
could be utilized to detect changes in vascular tortuosity due to
differential expression of various angiogenic factors [18], [19]
or to identify the morphological vessel pathogenesis of preclinical cancer models. In the clinical setting, this technique could be
used to delineate the tissue regions affected by the presence of
a tumor in order to aid in tumor detection and monitoring. The
main limitations of acoustic angiography are the limited depth
of penetration and the frame rate, which are currently limited
by mechanical scanning in the prototype dual-single element
design. Future dual-frequency transducer arrays will improve
imaging depth and frame rate, but imaging will still be limited
to superficial targets (a few centimeter, depending on the choice
of imaging frequencies) in clinical imaging. Despite these limitations, the image acquisition and processing method described
here is optimized for small animal imaging and can be a valuable
tool in investigating the tumor environment.
V. CONCLUSION
While acoustic angiography alone generates high-resolution
images of vasculature, the combined method of imaging and
image processing described in this letter enables the isolation
and morphological analysis of specific vessels in the image volume. Advances in cancer therapeutics rely on a comprehensive
understanding of the underlying mechanics influencing the tumor environment, and are, thus, dependent on the degree to
which tumor response can be observed and analyzed. Acoustic
angiography fulfills this need by providing a noninvasive method
of investigating one of the main components of the tumor environment: microvascular networks, and enables imaging of cancer based on its microvascular signature alone. The method described in this letter expands the analytical capacities of this new
technology and will enable researchers to characterize changes
in vascular structure in longitudinal in vivo studies of tumor
models.

1086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Rojas for MATLAB
code for 3-D ROI selection. They would also like to thank
S. R. Aylward, M. Heitz, and J. Andruejol for their work on customized
vessel displays in VesselView, and to F. S. Foster, E. Cherin, and M. Lee
for fabrication of dual-frequency transducers. P.A.D. declares that he
has an equity interest in SonoVol, Inc., a company which has licensed
technology described in this manuscript.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gessner et al., “High-resolution, high-contrast ultrasound imaging
using a prototype dual-frequency transducer: In vitro and in vivo studies,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 57, no. 8,
pp. 1772–1781, Aug. 2010.
[2] R. C. Gessner et al., “Acoustic angiography: A new imaging modality for
assessing microvasculature architecture,” Int J. Biomed. Imag., vol. 2013,
p. 936593, 2013.
[3] D. E. Kruse and K. W. Ferrara, “A new imaging strategy using wideband transient response of ultrasound contrast agents,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1320–1329, Aug.
2005.
[4] R. K. Jain, “Normalization of tumor vasculature: An emerging concept in
antiangiogenic therapy,” Science, vol. 307, pp. 58–62, Jan. 7, 2005.
[5] R. C. Gessner et al., “Mapping microvasculature with acoustic angiography yields quantifiable differences between healthy and tumor-bearing
tissue volumes in a rodent model,” Radiology, vol. 264, pp. 733–740, Sep.
2012.
[6] S. E. Shelton et al., “Quantification of microvascular tortuosity during
tumor evolution utilizing acoustic angiography,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 41, pp. 1896–1904, 2015.
[7] C. S. Manning et al., “Intravital imaging reveals conversion between
distinct tumor vascular morphologies and localized vascular response to
Sunitinib,” IntraVital, vol. 2, p. e24790, Jan. 2013.

[8] A. P. Pathak et al., “Three-dimensional imaging of the mouse neurovasculature with magnetic resonance microscopy,” Plos One, vol. 6, p. e22643,
Jul. 2011.
[9] R. A. Niesner and A. E. Hauser, “Recent advances in dynamic intravital
multi-photon microscopy,” Cytometry Part A, vol. 79A, pp. 789–798, Oct.
2011.
[10] S. Lee et al., “Three-dimensional reconstruction of neovasculature in
solid tumors and basement membrane matrix using ex vivo x-ray microcomputed tomography,” Microcirculation, vol. 21, pp. 159–170, Feb.
2014.
[11] J. Ehling et al., “Non-invasive imaging for studying anti-angiogenic therapy effects,” Thrombosis Haemostasis, vol. 109, pp. 375–390, Mar. 2013.
[12] J. S. Duncan et al., “Dynamic reprogramming of the kinome in response to targeted MEK inhibition in triple-negative breast cancer,” Cell,
vol. 149, pp. 307–321, Apr. 2012.
[13] S. R. Aylward and E. Bullitt, “Initialization, noise, singularities, and scale
in height ridge traversal for tubular object centerline extraction,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 61–75, Feb. 2002.
[14] E. Bullitt et al., “Analyzing attributes of vessel populations,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 9, pp. 39–49, Feb. 2005.
[15] X. Y. Yang and M. V. Knopp, “Quantifying tumor vascular heterogeneity
with dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging: A review,”
J. Biomed. Biotechnol., vol. 2011, 2011.
[16] C. C. Chien et al., “Gold nanoparticles as high-resolution X-ray imaging
contrast agents for the analysis of tumor-related micro-vasculature,” J.
Nanobiotechnol., vol. 10, Mar. 2012.
[17] Y. Gazit et al., “Fractal characteristics of tumor vascular architecture
during tumor growth and regression,” Microcirculation-London, vol. 4,
pp. 395–402, Dec. 1997.
[18] J. Grunstein et al., “Isoforms of vascular endothelial growth factor act in
a coordinate fashion To recruit and expand tumor vasculature,” Mol. Cell
Biol., vol. 20, pp. 7282–7291, Oct. 2000.
[19] S. Lee et al., “Processing of VEGF-A by matrix metalloproteinases regulates bioavailability and vascular patterning in tumors,” J. Cell Biol.,
vol. 169, pp. 681–691, May 2005.

