IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

2763

Behavioral Informatics and Computational Modeling
in Support of Proactive Health Management and Care
Misha Pavel∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, Holly B. Jimison, Member, IEEE, Ilkka Korhonen, Senior Member, IEEE,
Christine M. Gordon, and Niilo Saranummi, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Health-related behaviors are among the most significant determinants of health and quality of life. Improving health
behavior is an effective way to enhance health outcomes and mitigate the escalating challenges arising from an increasingly aging
population and the proliferation of chronic diseases. Although it
has been difficult to obtain lasting improvements in health behaviors on a wide scale, advances at the intersection of technology and
behavioral science may provide the tools to address this challenge.
In this paper, we describe a vision and an approach to improve
health behavior interventions using the tools of behavioral informatics, an emerging transdisciplinary research domain based on
system-theoretic principles in combination with behavioral science
and information technology. The field of behavioral informatics has
the potential to optimize interventions through monitoring, assessing, and modeling behavior in support of providing tailored and
timely interventions. We describe the components of a closed-loop
system for health interventions. These components range from fine
grain sensor characterizations to individual-based models of behavior change. We provide an example of a research health coaching platform that incorporates a closed-loop intervention based on
these multiscale models. Using this early prototype, we illustrate
how the optimized and personalized methodology and technology
can support self-management and remote care. We note that despite the existing examples of research projects and our platform,
significant future research is required to convert this vision to fullscale implementations.
Index Terms—Behavioral informatics, computational models,
health behavior change, multiscale, self-management, wearable
sensors.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE rapidly increasing cost and limited effectiveness of
healthcare is one of the most important societal and global
challenges. These circumstances have been exacerbated by an
aging “boomer” population and the increasing prevalence of
chronic diseases in younger demographics [1], [2]. In addition,
there is increasing recognition that lifestyle behaviors account
for a substantial portion of premature mortality (more than 40%)

T

Manuscript received January 15, 2015; revised April 22, 2015 and August 20,
2015; accepted September 18, 2015. Date of publication September 29, 2015;
date of current version November 20, 2015. This work was supported in part by
the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant 1111965, Grant 1407928,
Tekes; FiDiPro, National Institutes of Nursing Research Grant P20NR015320.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Pavel is with the Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115 USA
(e-mail: m.pavel@neu.edu).
H. B. Jimison and C. M. Gordon are with the Northeastern University.
I. Korhonen is with the Tampere University of Technology.
N. Saranummi is with the VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2484286

[3]–[5] and are responsible for the majority of functional health
and quality-of-life outcomes [6]. These observations would suggest the need to focus resources on improving health-related
behaviors. Traditionally, health behaviors have been defined as
actions taken by a person to maintain, attain, or regain good
health and prevent illness. Lifestyle and health-related behaviors include physical activity, such as exercise, nutrition, alcohol
consumption, sleeping, socialization, and smoking. These may
be overt (motor or verbal) and directly measurable, or covert
(activities not viewable, e.g., physiological responses) and indirectly measurable. In essence, behaviors are physical events
that occur in the body and are controlled by the brain [7], [8].
Unfortunately, poor health behaviors and habits appear to be
easily acquired but difficult to eliminate. Perhaps even more
challenging is the fact that once developed, good habits and behaviors are difficult to maintain long term. One possible way to
address these issues is through personal face-to-face coaching,
but this approach is costly and difficult to scale. Alternatively,
recent advances in sensor and communication technology, in
combination with data and computational modeling, can play
a pivotal role in transforming health behavior change interventions [9]. Concurrent developments in sensor and communication technology and data science have now enabled the unprecedented quantification of behaviors in “the wild”—in real life and
in real time [9]. These two factors, in combination with progress
in computational modeling, have paved the way for the nascent
field of behavioral informatics. Behavioral informatics is a scientific and engineering area comprising behavior monitoring,
assessment, computational modeling, inference, and intervention. This field is poised to advance a set of technologies and
computational approaches to facilitate successful interventions
that are scalable, cost effective, and timely.
This paper describes an approach—currently in the evaluation stage—that provides an economically feasible method for
helping people to improve and manage their health behaviors.
The essence of this approach, shown in Fig. 1, is a coaching system composed of a number of components (or building
blocks) that “closes the loop” between data acquisition and intervention. These components transform information from the
physical world into data via a variety of sensors that can measure
behaviors that are overt (motor or verbal) and directly measurable, or covert (activities that are not viewable, e.g., physiological responses) and indirectly measurable. The data collected are
combined with subjective responses from the participants and
processed by model-based assessment, predictive inference, and
assessment algorithms that translate the data into useful information for a human coach, assisted by an artificial intelligence

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. Framework for Northeastern University’s Health Coaching Platform
includes a dynamic user model based on initial assessments and updated with
sensor data. This user model drives the semiautomated tailored messaging for
the health interventions.

Fig. 1. Individual sensors collect data from the home and environment. Inference algorithms generate estimates of behaviors, context, and important clinical
states, which are used in health interventions. Tailored summaries and feedback
are presented to the patient.

embedded into a coaching platform, in supporting individuals
in improving health behaviors.
In this paper, we describe the structure of our prototype Health
Coaching Platform and address aspects of the components necessary to supports its functions. One critical element to achieve
this goal of closing the loop involves the development of multiscale computational models that capture aspects of behaviors
at different scales, ranging from acquiring and processing raw
sensor data, such as leg motion measurement or beat-to-beat
heart rate (HR) monitoring, to quantify activities like eating,
physical activity, and sleeping. These models provide predictions that generate prompts and cues to provoke and encourage
behavior change in an optimal manner for each individual at
the appropriate time. The combination of sensors with multiscale computational models allows us to observe and assess human behaviors unobtrusively, infer and predict individual health
states and likely behaviors, and deliver optimal just-in-time
interventions.
II. CLOSING THE LOOP WITH INTERVENTION PROTOCOLS
In healthcare and health psychology literature, there is considerable evidence that health interventions tailored to individuals are more effective than generic ones [10]–[12], and that
timely feedback plays an important role in changing and sustaining behavior [13]. Coaching interventions that incorporate
data from new sensor technologies and new methods for realtime communication with patients have the capability of enhancing the tailoring and timeliness of coaching feedback and
encouragement. Computational models that provide an assessment of patient state, activities, and context (such as location
or previous activities) can make health behavior interventions
both more effective and scalable. As an example, our work on

health coaching interventions for older adults in the home [14]
uses a Health Coaching Platform with a data flow illustrated in
Fig. 2. The blue boxes at the top of the diagram show how data
from the initial interview, combined with monitoring data, builds
and updates a dynamic user model which in turn determines the
coaching actions. Based on this data flow, our work has explored
methods for delivering tailored coaching using state-dependent
active methods triggered by sensor data feedback and user input. This dynamic user model includes health behavior change
variables, such as motivations, barriers, and readiness-to-change
[15]. Fig. 2 illustrates that the inputs to the dynamic user model
(both initial assessments and updates based on inferences from
the sensor data) are used to select phrases from the message
database for generating alerts and tailored coaching messages.
The dynamic user model represents the current state of the
patient and drives the semiautomated tailored messaging for the
health interventions, as displayed in tailored interfaces for each
stakeholder. This system was designed to facilitate a health
coach, trained in health behavior change, in reaching a large
panel of older adult participants in their home environment.
The Health Coaching Platform includes modules for cognitive
exercise [14], [16], physical exercise [17], sleep management
[14], [18], medication management [19], and socialization [20].
As an additional source of information about a patient, coaching protocols that take advantage of the rapid uptake of new
mobile communications technologies have given rise to techniques for ecological momentary assessment (EMA) [21]–[24]
and just-in-time adaptive intervention (JITAI) [25]. Sensor feedback (usually from wearables or the user’s smart phone) can be
used to trigger a quick assessment (EMA) or coaching message
(JITAI) that is timely as well as context and location appropriate. In addition to being effective, these approaches are more
scalable than traditional health behavior interventions [26].
To realize this goal, it is necessary to develop ways to monitor
physical and physiological aspects of behaviors, convert the raw
data into behavioral inferences, and then generate behavioral interventions. We demonstrate that this can be accomplished with

PAVEL et al.: BEHAVIORAL INFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF PROACTIVE HEALTH MANAGEMENT

TABLE I
SAMPLE OF DATA SOURCES (E—ENVIRONMENT, M—MOBILE, O—OTHER)
Sensor
PIR
Contact Switches
Bed sensors
3-D Cameras (Kinect)
Accelerometers
Gyroscopes
Computer/keyboard
RFID
Environmental sensors
Electrodes, optical sensor
Mobile phone usage log, calendar
Credit card log
Questionnaires

Phenomena

Type

Movement of a person
Open/close doors
Movements, HR, respiration
Image & depth
Physical activity
Orientation, gestures
User interactions
Proximity to objects
Temperature, light, noise, etc.
HR
Social interactions, stress,
Diet, other behaviors
Any behaviors and affective states

E
E
E
E
M
M
E, M
E, M
E, M
M
M
O
O

a sequence of building blocks aided by computational models at
each stage. Accordingly, there are three key areas that cover the
different types of models needed to optimize the intervention.
1) Data science addressing acquisition of raw data.
2) Actions and activity recognition from raw data.
3) Models of health behavior change.
Although we have developed a Health Coaching Platform
based on these principles with the previously described building blocks and subjected it to initial evaluation [14], [17], [19],
[20], [27], [28], there are many remaining challenges that arise
in the process of applying this approach to specific domains.
The subsequent sections of this paper describe relevant aspects
of data science followed by a multiscale modeling approach with
examples converting raw data to usable knowledge enabling inferences and predictions. We then describe early approaches to
computational modeling of behavior change—the most challenging and least developed area to date. Although we cover a
number of existing realizations, we have also noted challenges
that still need to be addressed where appropriate.

2765

the task or context (e.g., location, background activity). In our
previous work, we have found that outlier measurements and
missing data may frequently require understanding of the specific circumstances [31]. When monitoring health behaviors,
missing data are often missing not at random, but rather are correlated with the activity or the state of the monitored individual.
For example, patients may stop weighing themselves when they
have been consuming high calorie foods or eating more than
normal, yet be more likely to weigh themselves when adhering
to their dietary goals. Knowledge and modeling of this bias is
important when inferring the intervening weight measurements
in a coaching intervention.
An additional process limiting data utility to be addressed by
data science approaches is the censoring of data, where due to
the measurement methodology, the value or observation is only
partially known. Censoring may arise from a subject’s early
withdrawal from a study or from limitations of a sensor or assessment instrument. For example, a sensor’s limited dynamic
range or limits of response scales on questionnaires could censor the acquired data. Quite often, it is apparent that subjects
“top out” or “bottom out” on assessment scales used in clinical trials. To mitigate these problems, we advocate improving
the dynamic range of both sensors and clinical assessments and
model the distortions due to these limits. For example, clinical
assessments are improved by anchoring the scales, i.e., providing examples of minimum and maximum limits, and by modeling subjects’ ratings using scaling techniques such as the Item
Response Theory [32]. In case of physical sensors, the effects
of these aberrations can be reduced by modeling the distortions.
A useful approach to mitigate a variety of data issues is to
combine data from multiple sensors, deploying a variety of fusion techniques. A specific example is the inference of smoking
behavior from accelerometers and pulmonary plethysmography
[33], [34]. Although there has been significant progress in a
number of specific areas, there is a need for further research to
address general context-dependent sensing.

III. DATA SCIENCE IN SUPPORT OF BEHAVIOR MONITORING
Data quality assurance is critical in any sensing application,
but particularly when using minimally obtrusive or unobtrusive
heterogeneous sensors and data types. In fact, in behavioral
informatics, the notion of a “sensor” needs to be interpreted
broadly in that a sensor or sensor stream may represent any
source of raw data related to behaviors as illustrated by the
examples in Table I. This table lists a small subset of sensors
that have been used in a variety of studies and applications in
behavioral informatics. There are numerous examples where the
understanding of underlying processes is necessary in order to
assess and improve the generalizability of the analyzed results
ranging from physical activities [29] to searching the Internet
[30].
Oftentimes, the context affecting the collected data is unknown and must be estimated; thus, limiting the interpretability of the observations. For example, in addition to subjectdependent variability, the data may be affected by location and
environmental factors, resulting in apparent outliers. It might
be necessary to have adaptive filtering or sampling based on

IV. MODELS OF SENSING AND ACTIVITY RECOGNTION
Considering the goal of optimizing JITAI as a controltheoretic problem, it is necessary to assess and predict behaviors continuously or at least sufficiently frequently. This
requires continuous application of behavioral informatics, including sensing, assessment, and inference of behaviors. Since
raw sensor data can typically only measure fine grain physical
phenomena, it is necessary to make inferences about behaviors
with computational multiscale models as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Raw sensor data provide fine grain information about physical
phenomena, such as instantaneous acceleration, that may need
to be converted to elementary movements and actions that may
in turn provide information about the activity and health-related
behaviors, such as exercising. In the remainder of this section,
we will describe the different building blocks for converting
data to estimates of activity and patient states.
Prior to the description of the multiscale modeling details, we
note that the continuous monitoring of behaviors and physiological phenomena has the potential of revolutionizing not only

2766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

ability to perform activities of daily living (exercising, making
a meal, taking a bath, getting dressed, etc.) must be inferred
from an imperfect sensing of location, device interaction, and
acceleration data. An effective way to mitigate these challenges
is to develop computational models of sensors, which provide
transformations from raw sensor data and actions, while incorporating context as much as possible. This usually involves a
strategy of combining information from multiple sensors.
B. Computational Models of Sensors

Fig. 3. Example of a multiscale model used for an inference of exercising
behaviors from two different sensors—accelerometers and an optical HR monitoring device.

behavioral interventions but also clinical assessments and therapy by providing information about subtle changes, trends, and
variability assessments within individuals.
Diverse sensors and their resulting data streams represent the
first stage in the quantification of behaviors. For example, a participant’s responses to questions, observations of caregivers, or
clinicians as noted in the electronic health record, a participant’s
telephone use history, purchasing history, or similar sources of
behavior related data may all provide information used in computational models to estimate activities or patient state. These
additional types of assessments can now be made more frequently using mobile phones for EMA [23], [24], where patient
self report, such as aspects of health or psychological states that
are not yet amenable to unobtrusive sensing, provide important
inputs to a health behavior change model.
A. Models of Data Streams
The first step in the assessment of behaviors includes a transformation from raw sensor data to useful information. What
makes this task particularly challenging is the need to quantify
behaviors in real life and in natural environments with data acquisition methodologies that are as unobtrusive as possible. Our
own work, as well as that of other researchers, suggests that any
methodology that requires the participants to wear, operate, and
maintain devices solely for monitoring can only be sustained for
limited periods of time [35], [36]. To overcome this limitation,
sensors need to be unobtrusively embedded in the environment
or in devices used for other purposes, such as mobile telephones.
Alternatively, they may be nested in motivating systems like
step counting devices or safety alarms [37]. As a result of the
unobtrusive nature of sensing, the data usually represent only
surrogate markers of the phenomenon of interest, e.g., acceleration rather than energy expenditure. Consequently, raw data
are subject to distortions, contamination with noise, and significant effects of the context of the measurement. Although these
undesirable influences are common with almost any biomedical
measurement, it is particularly significant in unobtrusive assessment of behaviors. For example, the assessment of older adults’

Sensing can be interpreted as a measurement process that associates numerical elements to attributes of a class of objects
or events. We formalize a measurement process as a transformation H that maps health and behavior-related events, objects,
or states ψ ∈ Ψ to elements in a numerical set Y [38]. The
map H assigns a numerical value to aspects of events or actions,
y (t) = H [ψ] (t). For example, using an accelerometer attached
to the waist of an individual, the transformation H converts acceleration during walking or riding a car to sampled acceleration
contaminated by the noise. It is also essential to recognize that a
sensor transformation frequently depends on the context of the
observation, namely y = H [ψ; C], where the vector C represents the context of the observation, with context defined as the
set of environmental and situational aspects that affect the interpretation of the primary measurements and observations [39],
[40]. For example, in the case of the accelerometry, it is important to distinguish data collected during running from those
collected while riding in a car over rough but periodic terrain.
Similarly, observing changes in HR and HR variability (HRV)
to assess the rate of energy expenditure (power), the context
may involve an activity such as running in contrast to watching
an exciting film.
Although sensing the torso acceleration, the purpose of these
measurements is to infer aspects of the actions and activities ψ.
If H were known, invertible and noiseless, we could estimate
the features of the actions by inverting the transformation H,
namely ψ̂ = H −1 [y; C] . In most practical situations, however,
H is unknown and must be approximated; in every case, it is
important to incorporate as much as possible principled information about the transformation. In the case of accelerometry,
energy expenditure is governed by Newton’s laws, combined
with the effects of the location of the sensor. In many situations,
the fundamental principles are difficult to incorporate, and the
transformation is estimated using data-driven approaches. Even
in these situations, it is useful to make assumptions that constrain
the transformation. For example, if H can be approximated by
a linear system and the uncertainties by Gaussian random variables, we could use the Kalman filter approach, or its various
extensions, for state estimation. In general, knowledge of H or
its approximations is useful in improving the estimates of the
states that are not directly observable.
A simple example of a model-based approach involves the
measurement of walking speed using passive infrared (PIR)
motion sensors mounted on the ceiling of a hallway [41]. Each
sensor event (firing) is an indication that a person is passing
through its field of view; from these firing times, it is possible

PAVEL et al.: BEHAVIORAL INFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF PROACTIVE HEALTH MANAGEMENT

to estimate the speed of walking. However, Hagler et al.’s study
[41] showed that even though the sensors were stationary, it was
necessary to model each sensor’s errors in both time and space in
order to obtain unbiased estimates of the speed of walking [41].
Thus, each firing of a PIR detector needed to be represented by a
pair (xi − εx , ti − εt ), where xi is the location, ti is the time of
the firing event of the ith sensor, and εx , εt are random variables
representing the uncertainty associated with the corresponding
dimensions. The reason for this type of representation is that
the temporal uncertainty representation alone was not sufficient
to account for the variability in the thermal signal generated by
a moving human body, which depends on variables like body
temperature and amount of clothing. As this example suggests,
principle-based modeling of sensed data does not only involve
the sensor processes but also aspects of the observed system, in
this case, the participant’s actions.
Another example involves the assessment of sleep using a
variety of force transducers and motion detectors. This approach
involves strain gauge force sensors (load cells) installed at the
four corners of a rectangular bed [42], [43]. This sensor setup
can be used to infer movements in the bed, breathing, and even
heartbeat. A biomechanical model of a breathing human was
used to interpret the changes in the forces at the bed corners.
Perhaps the most information-rich sensors involve continuous video data streams (see the review by Aggarwal and Ryoo
[44]) that covers a variety of the issues, including approaches
to activity classification discussed in the next section. Although
a video-based assessment raises concerns of privacy, these can
frequently be alleviated by converting images to a greatly reduced numerical representation, eliminating the possibility of
recovering the original images.
Although many implemented approaches to the interpretation
of the sensor data exist, there are remaining challenges that
need to be addressed. These include unobtrusive and adaptive
calibration, sensor placement, and context invariance.
C. Modeling and Recognition of Activities
The ability to recognize people’s activities (exercising, gardening, etc.) is one of the pillars of behavior informatics, with
applications ranging from healthcare to designing robots that
interact with people. For behavior change interventions, knowledge of activities throughout the day provides useful information
for generating optimal intervention strategies. In the case of caring for older adults, this information enables assistance when
needed in their daily living activities [45]. Activity recognition
also includes the detection of anomalies and adverse events,
such as falls or deviant behaviors in security and surveillance
applications.
In the most general terms, the problem of activity recognition
amounts to inference of human dynamics typically involving
movements or interactions with objects or other humans. Ideally,
the inference problem involves classification of activities from
estimates of movements and actions obtained from sensors as
discussed in the previous section.
Although the framework for activity recognition is similar to
that for sensor transformation, the domain of activity recognition

2767

is more general, involving estimation and classification based
on the sensor inferences. Most of the approaches involve datadriven methods in combination with state transition models,
context-free stochastic grammar, and space-time trajectories,
although there have been approaches that incorporate “stick figure modeling” [46]–[48] which also incorporates biomechanical principles. Recent advances in 3-D image capture enable
effective model-based inferences. These have been used to assess gait parameters and exercise performance [49]–[52]. One
useful example deploys hybrid models of gait that combine continuous dynamical systems with discrete phase switching [50].
This biomechanical model has been particularly useful in the
interactive exercise interventions and coaching intervention for
older adults using the Microsoft Kinect camera [17].
Despite the advantages of video-based activity assessment,
many existing studies monitoring older adults have used PIR
motion detectors for activity monitoring and recognition because of cost, power, and privacy issues. The data from these
sensors are sequences of firing events represented by sequences
of pairs S = {(s1 , t1 ) , (s2 , t2 ) , . . . , (sn , tn )}, where si , ti represent the sensor identity and the time of firing, respectively. The
goal of the inference process is to assign labels to the elements
of S. This activity recognition processes must simultaneously
determine the boundaries between activities (segmentation) and
classifications. This is generally accomplished using a variety of
modeling techniques for supervised and unsupervised training
of clustering and recognition algorithms. As such, researchers
attempted to use hidden Markov models (HMM). Using this
type of approaches yielded reasonable activity recognition rates,
ranging from 0.60 to 0.80 [53], [54]. These approaches, based on
stationary sensors, can be complemented by mobile or wearable
devices, especially when the monitored individuals are outside
their homes [23], [55], [56].
Notwithstanding the advances in activity recognition, there
are many remaining challenges. One of the major barriers to
using existing approaches like machine learning for activity
classification is the difficulty in obtaining labeled data. Another
problem is testing the fundamental properties of activity models.
For example, the Markov property is rarely tested, and when it
is, rarely supported by the data.
D. Model-Based State Estimation From Physiological Sensors
There are a variety of wearable sensors for collecting physiological measurements in the home, workplace, or general
environment. These include sensors that measure blood glucose, blood pressure, electrodermal activity, oxygen saturation,
airway peak flows, and HR. Today, wearable sensors allow
continuous long term beat-to-beat monitoring of HR and HRV,
either based on electrocardiography or photoplethysmography.
As an example of inferring patient state from physiological measures, we will consider HR and HRV to estimate patient stress
and stress recovery. HR and HRV vary remarkably depending
on physical activity, stress, and health, making HR and HRV
interpretation complex. However, when combined with physiological and computational multiscale models, HRV may provide
rich information about several health behaviors.

2768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

step transforms moment-by-moment physiological parameter
vector data into physiologically and behaviorally meaningful
states. Finally, the classified state data may be transformed to
a more holistic representation of the individual’s physiological
and behavioral status over the entire monitoring period, providing total energy expenditure, total amount of physical activity
and exercise, and stress and recovery balance (see Fig. 5).
V. MODELS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE

Fig. 4. Model-based state classification based on beat-to-beat HR signal
analysis.

HR monitoring allows the assessment of the intensity of physical activity, as HR is almost linearly associated with oxygen
consumption (VO2) at moderate to submaximal intensities in
steady-state exercise [57]. However, the intensity of real-life
physical activity usually changes repeatedly, and the relationship between HR and VO2 is curvilinear for very low-intensity
physical activities and near-maximal exercise. A model based
on HRV, age, gender, weight, height, and self-reported physical
activity class was recently shown to provide accurate estimates
of the intensity of the physical activity during real-life conditions [58]. Hence, HRV monitoring allows reliable continuous
assessment of physical activity, exercising, and energy expenditure in real-life conditions. HRV is associated with functioning
of the autonomous nervous system and, hence, is modified by
stress and relaxation, physical activity, and health status [59].
However, HRV has high inter- and intraindividual variability,
which complicates the interpretation and the use of HRV as a
measure of stress. With a multiscale model-based approach, it
is possible to transform the HRV signal into a quantification of
an individual’s stress and recovery during daily life (see Fig. 4)
[60], [61]. The HRV signal is first analyzed using a sliding window approach to quantify HRV, detect respiration rate (based
on respiratory sinus arrhythmia), and estimate momentary oxygen consumption (VO2) and excess postexercise oxygen consumption [58]. This modeling step transforms raw sensor data
into physiologically relevant parameters. The next step applies
adaptive segmentation to divide the data into stationary and
transient segments, which are further classified based on their
physiological parameter values into the physiological states of
physical activity, physiological recovery, stress, and other. This

The task of optimizing interventions can be interpreted as
a control theory problem, where differences between observed
behaviors and desired behaviors are used to generate the most
effective input (intervention), as outlined in Fig. 1. An effective
utilization of the control-theoretic framework, however, requires
a quantitative characterization of the psychological state and
corresponding dynamics as a function of time for each individual
participant.
The characterization of health behaviors dynamics, as well
as their change, requires multiple time scales. For example,
the decision of whether or not to engage in a particular physical
activity or consume a healthy snack occurs on a scale of seconds
or minutes, but changing one’s lifestyle to accommodate regular
visits to the gym may take days or weeks.
The multiscale dynamics must be reflected in monitoring and
inference as well as in generation of interventions. For example,
activity recognition may derive moment-to-moment information about an individual’s physical activity, exercise, and sleep,
which may eventually accumulate into the quantification of behavioral patterns as compared to target behaviors, as illustrated
in Fig. 3. Interventions, such as reminders, suggestions, and
recommendations (e.g., for physical exercise or avoidance of
unhealthy foods), might be most effective as a JITAI.
In contrast to the momentary interventions, recommendations
for lifestyle changes influencing physical activity and exercise
may deliver information about the target quantities on a daily or
weekly level, and these targets should be dynamically adjusted
to account for potential other factors such as acute illnesses. To
optimize interventions, therefore, we need multiscale inference,
modeling, and prediction of behaviors, which in turn requires a
computational framework for behavior and behavior change.
A theoretical framework useful for predictive modeling in
many domains is based on system theory, exploiting a statespace representation. A typical dynamical system is defined in
terms of a state space Q (t) ∈ Ψ, an output vector V (t), and
input vector A (t) . To represent a behaving human, the inputs
may include environmental, contextual, and social stimuli, as
well as coaching events. The output vector comprises actions,
as described above and shown in Fig. 3, that may include limb
movements, speech acts, classified activities, or even responses
to questionnaires (EMAs). Both inputs and outputs are typically
random variables.
Although the system dynamics may be continuous, we assume that all the components are sampled at discrete times
described by a sequence Tn = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tn } , and the sequences of unobservable states, coaching inputs, and measurable

PAVEL et al.: BEHAVIORAL INFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF PROACTIVE HEALTH MANAGEMENT

2769

Fig. 5. Example of physiological and behavioral state classification based on a multiscale model of HRV. The line above describes cumulative autonomic nervous
system stress and recovery index from 0 (stressed) to 100 (fully recovered). The lower graph shows minute-to-minute state classification (green—physiological
recovery; red—physiological stress responses; blue—physical exercise; white—other state/nonclassified). Height of the bars represent strength of the physiological
reaction (Source: Firstbeat Technologies, Jyväskylä, Finland).

variables are given by Q (Tn ) , A (Tn ) , V (Tn ), respectively.
To make predictions, we need to represent the state transition
dynamics Q (tn +1 ) = G [Q (Tn ) , A (Tn )] and the observation
random sequences given by V (tn ) = R [Q (Tn )] .
Ideally, the state space and the state transition processes would
be determined by psychological, empirical, and theoretical research. Unfortunately, with very few exceptions, most psychological theories of behaviors and behavior change have not been
specified to characterize the dynamics at the different time scales
to enable continuous quantitative assessment and predictions for
individuals needed for the generation of optimal interventions.
In the following sections, we present recent attempts to address
this issue.

Fig. 6. Example of a HMM for the TTM of behavior change. Only a subset
of the states and transitions and output transformations are shown.

A. Discrete State-Space Representation
One starting point for this type of development was the Transtheoretical Model (TTM) of Behavior Change [62]–[64] postulating discrete states for “readiness to change.” For example, in
the TTM, a participant is assumed to progress through a small
number of “readiness-of-change” states: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, maintenance, and possibly termination [62].
Although as originally specified, the TTM has a number of
issues [65], including limited predictive power, it can be reformulated in terms of a discrete state transition model as shown
in Fig. 6. Adding several assumptions, some researchers proposed to characterize the behavior change process in terms of
a hidden (latent) HMM [66]–[68]. Markov models [69], [70],
and, in particular, HMM, have been effectively applied in many
disciplines, ranging from learning theories [71], [72] in psychology and bioinformatics to automatic speech and image recognition in engineering, and have very well-developed techniques
for training and inference (e.g., see Rabiner [73]). Although
HMM-based approaches are intuitively appealing for the characterization of behavior change [74], they are based on a number of strong but questionable assumptions, such as the Markov
property and its consequence—the exponential dwell time distribution. The Markov property may not hold because the prior

participant’s history may change the probability of transitions.
For example, the probability of a transition from the Preparation to the Action state may depend on whether the participant
has previously been in the Action state or has arrived there from
the Contemplation state. Similar issues arise when considering
whether the dwell (time spent) in a given state of the Markov
model is exponentially distributed; it is more likely that a participant would need some minimum time to spend in a given state
before transitioning to the next state. An additional issue with
using discrete state Markov models (see Fig. 6) relates to the fact
that any intervention, such as coaching, would affect the transition probabilities and preclude the use of many computational
tools for training and inference.
The discrete state Markov transition model could be modified
to mitigate some of these issues, but its increased complexity
would compromise its predictive power. For example, we could
use a hidden semiMarkov model (HSMM) [70], [75] that can incorporate arbitrary dwell distributions. As a result of this generalization, the typical training of the HSMM is significantly more
complex than the standard HMM. Incorporating the coaching
effect would require modification of the transition probabilities
that would likely reduce the predictive power of the discrete
state Markov model.

2770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

B. Linear Dynamical System Representation
Rivera et al. developed a structural equation model (SEM) of
health behavior change using linear dynamical control systems
[15], [76]. The model is based on the psychological theory of
planned behavior [77] that links perceived behavioral control,
subjective norm, and attitude toward behaviors to the actual
behaviors.
The linear dynamical system approach has been motivated by
structural equations modeling [78] of the theory of planned behavior [77] that generated parameter estimates using population
statistics and is itself based on the assumption of linear relationships and Gaussian distribution of errors. Although the SEM
represents a static asymptotic state of the system, Rivera et al.,
explored the generalization of SEM to a dynamical system, assuming that the SEM parameters can be used as the coefficients
of the differential equations representing the corresponding deterministic linear system [79].
Although this approach may eventually prove effective, it
has currently a number of limitations. In particular, the present
model has a large number of degrees of freedom (parameters),
so the complexity of the system may approach, or even exceed,
the degree of freedom in the data. As in the considerations
of HMM, strong assumptions, e.g., linearity, need to be tested
in order for this system to be used as an engine underlying
interventions. We anticipate that a modified version of such a
system, combined with certain nonlinear components, may be a
potentially effective representation.
C. Dual-Process Representation
During the last couple of decades, behavioral researchers
began considering a different class of models based on the dualprocess theory [80], [81]. There is substantial evidence that
human decisions are based on a combination of responses from
two concurrent systems. Type 1 represents an automatic process, generating habitual responses/behaviors that are executed
rapidly without conscious elaborations. A Type 2 process, such
as cognitive decision making, is based on explicit problemsolving, and, therefore, slower than the Type 1 system. Thus,
in cases where the systems compete, the faster Type 1 system
may frequently “win,” and we take action based on our habitual
response before we can apply reasoning. Because the habits that
correspond to unhealthy responses are generally more prevalent,
the Type 1 system’s short-term domination results in making
poor health behavior choices unless we modify these habitual
responses.
Another important difference between the two systems is the
speed of learning. A change in automatic habitual responses of
the Type 1 system occurs over a long time, requires a large number of trials, and extinguishes slowly [82]. The reasoning Type 2
system can learn rapidly through information, persuasion, and
motivation, but can forget just as quickly.
A modeling approach based on the dual-process theory has
a number of advantages in comparison to the two models described in previous sections. The computational modeling can
take advantage of existing research in psychology on decision

Fig. 7. Dynamics of a participant’s responses to coaching for increasing daily
physical activity. Simulated data from Spring et al. [83].

making and learning and may, therefore, be able to predict responses to stimuli in a variety of contexts. As such, it can incorporate mobile EMA and even trigger EMAs.
To provide an intuitive insight, we assume that each system
responds concurrently to a stimulus, such as the logo of a fast
food establishment. The system that responds faster will govern
the response generation. In order for a participant to make a
healthier choice, it is necessary to either train the Type 1 system
to develop healthier habits or to coach the Type 2 system to
anticipate and preempt the habitual responses.
To illustrate the ability of this model to reproduce the general
characteristics of experimental data, we simulated the results of
recently published experimental data from a study by Spring
et al. [83] that was designed to examine the dynamics of an intervention to increase the duration of the participants’ physical
activity per day. Each of the two types of systems was represented by a random variable that controlled each participant’s
decision process regarding the activity level. A sample of simulation results based on this data is shown in Fig. 7. The red solid
line represents the average daily activity in minutes, the black
dashed line represents the Type 1 system, and the blue dotted
line represents the Type 2 system. During the intervention, the
Type 2 process quickly learns to adhere to the coach’s guidance,
but it forgets to respond properly after the intervention is over.
During the same time, the Type 1 process expertise is learning
slowly, but takes over after the coaching ceases. This model can
then be used to directly predict individual participants’ activity
level as a function of time. The missing important ingredient of
this model is how to quantify the coaches’ interventions to be
able to predict the effect of these interventions and suggest the
optimal ones.

PAVEL et al.: BEHAVIORAL INFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF PROACTIVE HEALTH MANAGEMENT

2771

TABLE II
ACTIVITY SELECTIONS FOR THE LEVEL 1 PHASE OF THE SOCIALIZATION
COACHING INTERVENTION
Technology
Computer
Computer
Computer
Computer
Computer
Computer
Phone
In Person
In Person
In Person
In Person
In Person

Activity

Freq

Make a Skype call to family member, friend,
study participant, or coach
Participate in group Skype call
Send email to family member, friend, study
participant, or coach
Participate in online support group or chat
Play online card or board game with others
Use Facebook—new interaction
Make a phone call to family member, friend,
study participant, or coach
Visit with family or friends
Play a board or card game with someone
Participate in a community event
Participate in a volunteer activity
Walk in a public place (mall, park) for at least
10 min

1–3/wk
1/wk
1–3/wk
1/wk
1/wk
1/wk
1–3/wk
1–2/wk
1/wk
1/wk
1/wk
1/wk

VI. INTEGRATING MONITORING AND MODELING FOR
COACHING INTERVENTIONS
Our most recent evaluations of the Health Coaching Platform have tested the integration of data from sensors in the
home: computational models that infer patient state, context,
and adherence to goals; and intervention protocols to promote
health behavior change. For our intervention protocols on cognitive training, sleep management, socialization, and physical
exercise, we first use an in-home visit or Skype conferencing
to assess current activity levels, health behavior goal selection,
readiness to change, motivations, and barriers (when appropriate). For example, with our sleep intervention, we assessed
sleep hygiene issues, anxiety, and circadian rhythm patterns before recommending changes to the environment or relaxation
exercises. A tailored action plan was created and updated each
week. A total of 33 elderly participants (average age 80.3 ±
9.4 years) have now been coached over a period of two years,
with substudies on medication management [19], [84], socialization [20], and interactive video exercise using the Kinect
camera [17].
As an example of monitoring various types of data from the
home and providing feedback for a tailored health intervention,
our socialization module for older adults in the home focuses
on several proxy measures for inferring degree of socialization:
time and contacts on email, time and contacts on the phone,
time and contacts on Skype (all older participants and an enrolled remote family member use SkypeTM ), and inferred time
out of the home. To assess a baseline degree of socialization at
the beginning of an intervention, we use the Ludden social network scale-revised [85] and the UCLA-R loneliness scale [85].
For coaching purposes, we also use motivational interviewing
to assess motivations, barriers, and readiness-to-change for each
selected activity. Table II shows our Level 1 selection of socialization activities for an older adult participant’s weekly action
plan. The feedback and recording of their participation in the

Fig. 8. Weekly overall Skype usage (in minutes) by participants in the Socialization Intervention. The colors represent different participants.

intervention is based on computer, phone, or motion sensor data
from the home or self-report for the in-person activities.
With the subset of our coaching participants that chose a socialization intervention (nine participants, 73.8 ± 6.7 years, 89%
female), we found that we were able to maintain adherence to
their selected socialization activities over a period of nine weeks.
At baseline, only two-third of our participants was completely
satisfied with their level of socialization. Our goal was to be able
to provide a socialization intervention using Skype that could
improve their social network and time interacting with people.
Fig. 8 shows a graph of their overall Skype usage in minutes for
each week of the intervention. Although the usage dropped off
somewhat as time went on, most participants used Skype at least
1 h/week, communicating with an average of five people during
the intervention. All participants studied improved their level of
socialization and continued to see a benefit in the maintenance
phase of coaching (after the nine weeks) from using Skype to
communicate with remote family members and friends.
One of the challenges demonstrated by this example lies in
keeping adherence and motivation high throughout a lifestyle
intervention. Coaching protocols must adapt to an individual’s
change of state into a maintenance phase. Maintaining health behaviors is often harder to accomplish than a short-term change.
One of our approaches has been to offer a menu of weekly activities for variety and challenge, as well as multiple intervention
topics. The integration of estimates of patient state, context, and
adherence to goals provides a valuable framework for providing
tailored, timely, and potentially scalable health behavior change
interventions.
VII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE CHALLENGES
We have demonstrated the ability to integrate data science
with models of sensors, activity, context, and behavior change
into a coherent health coaching platform and deliver interventions in a way that keeps participants motivated and engaged.
However, there are still many issues needing further attention.
With special populations, such as older adults, ease-of-use and
meaningfulness of messaging remains a top priority. Expanding

2772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

use to minority and underserved populations will also need testing and design input. We currently have limited approaches to
modeling privacy and data sharing preferences. The informed
sharing of sensitive data requires insight that new participants
often lack. We need to be able to estimate preferences, and
do our best to share summarized data in a useful but privacy
preserving manner.
At the outset, we described a vision of behavioral informatics
in which unobtrusive sources of information are used to monitor,
assess, infer, and intervene to help people improve and manage
their behaviors, consequently improving their health and quality
of life. Despite the advances in sensor technology, data science,
computational modeling, inference, intervention optimization,
and machine-assisted coaching platforms, there are many remaining challenges that need to be surmounted to implement
this vision.
One of the outstanding problems stems from the variability
across and within individuals in their health behaviors. Developing generalizable behavior inference algorithms that would
not require a new training set for each new individual is inherently difficult. Although there have been some successes, there
is a need to improve training approaches that would generalize
across and within individuals without having a “ground truth.”
Behaviors related to activity (exercising, sleeping, physical
activity) are relatively observable and measurable by current
sensor technologies; the challenges in using these sensors in
long-term monitoring include technical concerns (such as battery life, user acceptance, and adherence to monitoring) and
inter- and intraindividual variability of the behavioral patterns.
Several important health behaviors are still difficult to observe
and quantify objectively and unobtrusively. These include diet,
nutrition, and energy intake. Assessment of social and emotional
aspects of behavior would also benefit from improved inference
and assessment techniques.
Another important issue is false alarm fatigue. The generation
of false alarms is a serious problem for behavioral informatics
because of the continuous monitoring of low probability events.
Under continuous or frequent monitoring, even well-performing
detectors will likely generate a high proportion of false alarms.
Consider, for example, a fall detector with sensitivity and specificity at 99%. For most detection tasks, this level of performance
would be considered very good. However, since the prior probability of a fall in each hour is extremely low (<0.01), continuous
monitoring may identify thousands of accelerometer or movement events to classify per hour; in this situation, a 99% specificity detector would generate about ten false alarms per hour.
Despite the detector performance, false alarm fatigue needs to
be addressed before these systems can be routinely used. One
intriguing approach to mitigating this problem is to incorporate
the utility of detecting an important event like a fall versus the
disutility of a false alarm in the decision process.
A closely related issue is the cost-benefit tradeoff of an intervention and participant adherence. This is intimately tied to the
problem of discounting future benefits relative to an immediate
cost. For example, if a coaching intervention is not perceived
to have immediate benefits, the participating individual may

not adhere to the shared goals and activities agreed to with the
coach. The challenge of preventive healthcare, in general, is to
increase the value of future benefits and convert them to more
immediate gains.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Future work in this area will generate a set of tools and methods that will help improve the well being of all, including older
adults, underserved populations, and those residing in rural areas
and is likely to have a significant societal impact. The proposed
computational modeling-based approach to the assessment of
behavioral, physical, cognitive, and affective states is expected
to revolutionize healthcare delivery, including the provision of
effective, timely, and targeted interventions. Further, the social benefits of behavioral informatics extend beyond healthcare, ranging from impacts in engineering disciplines, such as
robotics, automation, and surveillance, to broad areas of education, economics, and scientific thrusts such as U.S. President
Barack Obama’s Brain Initiative (connecting brain and behaviors). Additionally, work in this new area of behavioral informatics will inspire a new generation of students, who will be
able to address problems at the intersection of computer science,
engineering, and behavioral and social sciences.
The main tenant of this paper is the notion that multiscale
computational models ranging from sensors to behavioral decisions is an important prerequisite for optimizing interventions
aiding individuals in learning and adhering to better health behaviors. In conclusion, we would like to note that this paper only
begins to scratch the surface of the problem of helping people
to improve their health behaviors. Significant efforts in areas,
such as sensor development, modeling, algorithm design, and
clinical evaluations, are needed to address the complex issues
in improving health behaviors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank S. Hagler, D. Austin, J. Kaye,
T. Hayes, and many other colleagues at the Oregon Health and
Science University and the Tampere University of Technology
in Finland for contributions to this paper. They would also like to
thank D. Spruijz-Metz and W. Nilsen for valuable discussions,
and M. Wang and K. Nikita for shepherding this paper through
the preparation process.
REFERENCES
[1] PCAST, “Realizing the full potential of health information technology to
improve healthcare for Americans: The path forward,” President’s Council
of Advisors on Science and Technology, Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
[2] Center for Disease Control. (2009, Dec. 20). Chronic Diseases, The
Power to Prevent, The Call to Control: At A Glance. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag/pdf/
chronic.pdf
[3] J. M. McGinnis et al., “The case for more active policy attention to health
promotion,” Health Affairs, vol. 21, pp. 78–93, 2002.
[4] J. M. McGinnis and W. H. Foege, “Actual causes of death in the United
States,” JAMA, vol. 270, pp. 2207–2212, 1993.
[5] S. A. Schroeder, “We can do better—Improving the health of the American
people,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 357, pp. 1221–1228, 2007.

PAVEL et al.: BEHAVIORAL INFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF PROACTIVE HEALTH MANAGEMENT

[6] G. K. Vincent and V. A. Velkoff, The Next Four Decades: The Older
Population in the United States: 2010 to 2050. Washington, DC, USA:
U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S.
Census Bureau, 2010.
[7] S. Michie and M. Johnston, “Behavior change techniques,” in Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2013,
pp. 182–187.
[8] D. Spruijt-Metz et al., “Building new computational models to support
health behavior change and maintenance: New opportunities in behavioral
research,” Transl. Behav. Med., vol. 5, pp. 335–346, 2015.
[9] H. Wactlar et al., “Can computer science save healthcare?” IEEE Intell.
Syst., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 3–7, Sep./Oct. 2011.
[10] P. Krebs et al., “A meta-analysis of computer-tailored interventions for
health behavior change,” Prev. Med., vol. 51, pp. 214–221, 2010.
[11] S. J. Sohl and A. Moyer, “Tailored interventions to promote mammography screening: A meta-analytic review,” Prev. Med., vol. 45, pp. 252–261,
2007.
[12] V. J. Strecher et al., “Moderators and mediators of a web-based computertailored smoking cessation program among nicotine patch users,” Nicotine
Tobacco Res., vol. 8, pp. S95–S101, 2006.
[13] L. C. Ammerman et al., “The efficacy of behavioral interventions to modify dietary fat and fruit and vegetable intake: A review of the evidence,”
Prev. Med., vol. 35, pp. 25–41, 2002.
[14] H. B. Jimison and M. Pavel, “Integrating computer-based health coaching
into elder home care,” Assistive Technol. Res. Ser., vol. 21, pp. 122–129,
2008.
[15] D. E. Rivera and H. B. Jimison, “Systems modeling of behavior change:
Two illustrations from optimized interventions for improved health outcomes,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 41–47, Nov. 2013.
[16] S. Hagler et al., “Assessing executive function using a computer game:
Computational modeling of cognitive processes,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1442–1452, Jul. 2014.
[17] F. Ofli et al., “Design and evaluation of an interactive exercise coaching system for older adults: Lessons learned,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., Jan 13, 2015, to be published.
[18] J. M. Perez-Macias et al., “Comparative assessment of sleep quality estimates using home monitoring technology,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Aug. 2014, vol. 2014, pp. 4979–82.
[19] M. Pavel et al., “Optimizing medication reminders using a decisiontheoretic framework,” Stud. Health Technol. Informat., vol. 160, pp. 791–
795, 2010.
[20] H. B. Jimison et al., “A socialization intervention in remote health coaching for older adults in the home,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 7025–7028.
[21] A. A. Stone and S. Shiffman, “Ecological momentary assessment (EMA)
in behavorial medicine,” Ann. Behav. Med., vol. 16, pp. 199–202, 1994.
[22] S. Shiffman, “Conceptualizing analyses of ecological momentary assessment data,” Nicotine Tobacco Res., vol. 16, pp. S76–S87, 2014.
[23] S. S. Intille, “Technological innovations enabling automatic, contextsensitive ecological momentary assessment,” in The Science of Real-Time
Data Capture: Self-Report in Health Research, A. A. Stone, S. Shiffman,
A. A. Atienza, and L. Nebeling, Eds. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press,
2007, pp. 308–337.
[24] S. S. Intille et al., “Just-in-time context-sensitive questioning for preventative health care,” in Proceedings of the AAAI 2002 Workshop on
Automation as Caregiver: The Role of Intelligent Technology in Elder
Care. Menlo Park, CA, USA: AAAI Press, 2002.
[25] I. Nahum-Shani et al., “Just in time adaptive interventions (JITAIs): An
organizing framework for ongoing health behavior support,” Methodology Center, Tech. Rep., 14–126. University Park, PA: The Methodology
Center, Penn State. 2014.
[26] M. A. Adams et al., “An adaptive physical activity intervention for overweight adults: A randomized controlled trial,” PLoS One, vol. 8, p. e82901,
2013.
[27] S. Hagler et al., “Quantification of human movement for assessment in
automated exercise coaching,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 5836–5839.
[28] J. M. Perez-Macias et al., “Comparative assessment of sleep quality estimates using home monitoring technology,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 4979–4982.
[29] A. A. Ali et al., “mPuff: automated detection of cigarette smoking puffs
from respiration measurements,” in Proc.11th Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Sens.
Netw., 2012, pp. 269–280.
[30] D. M. Lazer et al., “The parable of Google Flu: Traps in big data analysis,”
Science, vol. 343, pp. 1203–1205, 2014.

2773

[31] E. E. Helander et al., “Are breaks in daily self-weighing associated with
weight gain?” PloS One, vol. 9, p. e113164, 2014.
[32] S. E. Embretson and S. P. Reise, Item Response Theory. East Sussex, U.K.:
Psychology Press, 2013.
[33] E. Ertin et al., “AutoSense: Unobtrusively wearable sensor suite for inferring the onset, causality, and consequences of stress in the field,” in Proc.
9th ACM Conf. Embedded Netw. Sens. Syst., 2011, pp. 274–287.
[34] S. Nazir et al., “puffMarker: A multi-sensor approach for pinpointing the
timing of first lapse in smoking cessation,” in Proc. ACM Int. Joint Conf.
Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput., 2015, pp. 999–1010.
[35] D. Ledger and D. McCaffrey, Inside Wearables: How the Science of
Human Behavior Change Offers the Secret to Long-Term Engagement,
Endeavour Partners, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014.
[36] S. Mitesh et al., “Wearable devices as facilitators, not drivers, of health
behavior change,” JAMA, vol. 313, pp. 459–460, 2015.
[37] A. K. Sarela et al., “IST Vivago—An intelligent social and remote wellness
monitoring system for the elderly,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. EMBS Spec. Topic
Conf. Inf. Technol. Appl. Biomed., Birmingham, U.K., 2003, pp. 362–
365.
[38] D. Krantz et al., Foundations of Measurement, Vol. I: Additive and Polynomial Representations. New York, NY, USA: Academic, 1971.
[39] H. B. Jimison and M. Pavel, “A utility and context based framework for
addressing the machine learning challenges of detecting rare but important
clinical events “ in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
Whistler, BC, p. 44. 2010 http://media.nips.cc/Conferences/2010/NIPS2010-Workshop- Book.pdf.
[40] S. Thiemjarus and G.-Z. Yang, “Context-aware sensing,” in Body Sensor
Networks. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2006, pp. 287–331.
[41] S. Hagler et al., “Unobtrusive and ubiquitous in-home monitoring: A
methodology for continuous assessment of gait velocity in elders,” IEEE
Trans Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 813–20, Apr. 2010.
[42] Z. T. Beattie et al., “Classification of breathing events using load cells
under the bed,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Eng. Future Biomed., 2009, pp. 3921–3924.
[43] A. Adami et al., “Using load cells under the bed as a non-contact method
for detecting periodic leg movements,” IRBM, vol. 35, pp. 334–340,
2014.
[44] J. K. Aggarwal and M. S. Ryoo, “Human activity analysis: A review,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 43, pp. 1–43, 2011.
[45] S. Katz, “Assessing self-maintenance: activities of daily living, mobility,
and instrumental activities of daily living,” J. Amer. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 31,
pp. 721–727, 1983.
[46] J. A. Webb and J. K. Aggarwal, “Structure from motion of rigid and jointed
objects,” Artif. Intell., vol. 19, pp. 107–130, 1982.
[47] S. A. Niyogi and E. H. Adelson, “Analyzing gait with spatiotemporal
surfaces,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Motion Non-Rigid Articulated Objects,
1994, pp. 64–69.
[48] L. W. Campbell and A. F. Bobick, “Recognition of human body motion
using phase space constraints,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 1995,
pp. 624–630.
[49] T. Banerjee et al., “Detecting foreground disambiguation of depth images
using fuzzy logic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst., 2013, pp. 1–7.
[50] A. D. Ames, R. Vasudevan, and R. Bajcsy, “Human-data based cost
of bipedal robotic walking,” in Proceedings of the 14th international
conference on Hybrid systems: computation and control, pp. 153–162,
2011.
[51] E. Stone and M. Skubic, “Evaluation of an inexpensive depth camera
for in-home gait assessment “ J. Ambient Intell. Smart Environ., vol. 3,
pp. 349–361, 2011.
[52] E. Stone and M. Skubic, “Testing real-time in-home fall alerts with embedded depth video hyperlink,” presented at the Int. Conf. Smart Homes
Health Telematics, Denver, CO, USA, 2014.
[53] L. Chen et al., “Sensor-based activity recognition,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev.., vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 790–808, Nov. 2012.
[54] N. C. Krishnan and D. J. Cook, “Activity recognition on streaming sensor
data,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 10, pp. 138–154, 2014.
[55] J. Parkka et al., “Activity classification using realistic data from wearable
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 119–128,
Jan. 2006.
[56] T. Choudhury et al., “The mobile sensing platform: An embedded activity
recognition system,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 32–41,
Apr. 2008.
[57] S. Mutikainen et al., “Objectively measured physical activity in Finnish
employees: A cross-sectional study,” BMJ Open, vol. 4(12), p. e005927,
2014.

2774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

[58] J. Smolander et al., “Estimating oxygen consumption from heart rate and
heart rate variability without individual calibration,” Clin. Physiol. Funct.
Imag., vol. 31, pp. 266–271, 2011.
[59] J. Koolhaas et al., “Stress revisited: A critical evaluation of the stress
concept,” Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 35, pp. 1291–1301, 2011.
[60] G. N. Dikecligil and L. R. Mujica-Parodi, “Ambulatory and challengeassociated heart rate variability measures predict cardiac responses to
real-world acute emotional stress,” Biol. Psych., vol. 67, pp. 1185–1190,
2010.
[61] FirstBeat. (2014). Stress and Recovery Analysis Method Based on
24-hour Heart Rate Variability. [Online]. Available: http://www.
firstbeat.com/userData/firstbeat/research-publications/Stress-andrecovery_white-paper_2014.pdf
[62] J. O. Prochaska et al., “In search of how people change: Applications to
addictive behaviors,” Amer. Psychol., vol. 47, pp. 1102–1114, 1992.
[63] J. O. Prochaska and W. F. Velicer, “The transtheoretical model of health
behavior change,” Amer. J. Health Promotion, vol. 12, pp. 38–48, 1997.
[64] W. F. Velicer and J. O. Prochaska, “Stage and nonstage theories of behavior
and behavior change: A comment on schwarzer,” Appl. Psychol., vol. 57,
pp. 75–83, 2008.
[65] P. Stoica and R. L. Moses, Spectral Analysis of Signals. Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2005.
[66] U. Böckenholt, “A latent Markov model for the analysis of longitudinal data collected in continuous time: states, durations, and transitions,”
Psychol. Methods, vol. 10, pp. 65–83, 2005.
[67] E. Seto and R. Bajcsy, “Modeling physical activity behavior change,”
in Wearable Sensors: Fundamentals, Implementation and Applications,
E. Sazonov and M. R. Neuman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2014.
[68] J. K. Vermunt et al., “Latent class models in longitudinal research,” in
Handbook of Longitudinal Research: Design, Measurement, and Analysis.
New York, NY, USA: Academic, 2008, pp. 373–385.
[69] J. G. Kemeny and J. L. Snell, Finite Markov Chains, vol. 356. Princeton,
NJ, USA: van Nostrand, 1960.
[70] W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications,
vol. 2. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2008.
[71] M. F. Norman, Markov Processes and Learning Models, vol. 84. New
York, NY, USA: Academic, 1972.
[72] I. Visser et al., “Fitting hidden Markov models to psychological data,” Sci.
Program, vol. 10, pp. 185–199, 2002.
[73] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257–286,
Feb. 1989.
[74] P. R. Killeen, “Markov model of smoking cessation,” Proc. Nat. Acad Sci.,
vol. 108, pp. 15549–15556, 2011.
[75] M. Pavel et al., “The role of technology and engineering models in transforming healthcare,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 6, pp. 156–177, Apr.
2013. DOI: 10.1109/RBME.2012.2222636
[76] J.-E. Navarro-Barrientos et al., “A dynamical model for describing behavioural interventions for weight loss and body composition change,”
Math. Comput. Model. Dyn. Syst., vol. 17, pp. 183–203, 2011.
[77] I. Ajzen, “The theory of planned behavior,” Org. Behav. Hum. Decision
Processes, vol. 50, pp. 179–211, 1991.
[78] K. A. Bollen and M. D. Noble, “Structural equation models and the quantification of behavior,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 108, pp. 15639–15646,
2011.
[79] C. Martin et al., “A dynamical systems model of social cognitive theory,”
in Proc. Amer. Control Conf., 2014, pp. 2407–2412.
[80] W. Hofmann et al., “juImpulse and self-control from a dual-systems perspective,” Perspectives Psychol. Sci., vol. 4, pp. 162–176, 2009.
[81] D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 1st ed. New York, NY, USA:
Farrar, Straus, 2011.
[82] R. M. Shiffrin and W. Schneider, “Controlled and automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending and a
general theory,” Psycholo. Rev., vol. 84, pp. 128–190, 1977.
[83] B. Spring et al., “Multiple behavior changes in diet and activity: A randomized controlled trial using mobile technology,” Arch. Internal Med.,
vol. 172, pp. 789–796, 2012.
[84] D. Young, “Collaborative medication adherence for elderly adults in a
home environment,” Tech. Rep., 2013.
[85] M. V. Zunzunegui et al., “Social networks, social integration, and social
engagement determine cognitive decline in community-dwelling Spanish
older adults,” J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci., vol. 58, pp. S93–S100,
Mar. 2003.

Misha Pavel (S’67-M’75-LSM’11) received the
Ph.D. degree in experimental psychology from New
York University, New York, NY, USA, the M.S.
degree in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, and the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute
of Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New York.
He is currently a Professor of Practice jointly appointed between the College of Computer and Information Sciences and the Bouvé College of Health Sciences at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
He is also a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland. He was the Chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering (he
founded in 2001) and as the Director of the Point of Care Laboratory, which
focuses on unobtrusive monitoring, neurobehavioral assessment, and computational modeling in support of healthcare, with a particular focus on chronic
disease and elder care. He came to Boston from a position of a Program Director of Smart and Connected Health on a leave from Oregon Health and
Science University where he was a Professor at the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, with a joint appointment in the Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology. In addition to his academic career, he was a
Member of the technical staff at Bell Laboratories in early 1970s, where his
research interests included network analysis and modeling, and later at AT&T
Laboratories with focus on mobile and Internet-based technologies. His current
fundamental research is at the intersection of multilevel computational modeling of complex behaviors of biological and cognitive systems, and augmented
cognition. His most recent efforts are fundamental science and technology that
would enable the transformation of healthcare to be proactive, distributed and
patient-centered.

Holly Brugge Jimison (M’12) is a Professor in the
College of Computer and Information Sciences and
the College of Health Sciences at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. Her research involves developing design principles for technology to enable
patients to be more active and involved in their health
care. She is currently the Director of Northeastern.s
Consortium on Technology for Proactive Care focused on developing foundations as well as applications preventive and personalized healthcare. Among
her key projects is tailoring health interventions based
on feedback from in-home monitoring for diverse populations including older
adults and those with neurological diseases. This research comprises computer
modeling projects for assessing cognitive states using embedded metrics within
adaptive computer games. She is recently a Technology Advisor and Health Scientist with the Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research at the National
Institutes of Health. Her National Institutes of Health work focused on defining
new research directions for shared medical decision making and on “big data”
initiatives related to developing clinically relevant behavioral markers based on
the monitoring of health behaviors in the home and environment.

PAVEL et al.: BEHAVIORAL INFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF PROACTIVE HEALTH MANAGEMENT

Ilkka Kimmo Juhani Korhonen is a Ph.D. Adjunct
Professor at Personal Health Informatics, Tampere
University of Technology, Tampere, Finland, founding partner of PulseOn Oy. He was a Senior Manager in Wellness Business Program, Corporate Alliances and Business Development, Nokia Corporation, Espoo, Finland, and the Chief Research Scientist, Technology Manager, and Research Professor
at ICT for Health, VTT Technical Research Center
of Finland. His research interests include personal
health informatics—making consumers as the primary user of their own health information; behavior informatics, use of technologies for behavioral tracking, computational modeling of behaviors, prediction
of them, and eventually changing them for good; wearable health monitoring,
especially monitoring and analysis of heart rate and physical activity; personal
health systems, mHealth, eHealth, and ambient assisted living technologies and
applications; especially wellness and chronic disease management technologies
targeting consumer empowerment; biosignal interpretation methods and systems; especially for patient monitoring in critical care, home health care, to
support independent living, for wellness management, and context sensitivity;
critical care patient monitoring, adequacy of anaesthesia monitoring, level of
analgesia monitoring; commercialization of personal and consumer health informatics and mHealth/eHealth, start-ups, business strategy, business models.
He became a Member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (IEEE/EMBS) and was elected as Europe representative of Administrative Committee Member, 1.1.2010 -31.12.2012; IEEE/EMBS Member in 1999,
Senior Member in 2011. He was an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE/IEEE Journal of Biomedical
Health Informatics in 2002, became Editorial Board Member of Methods of
Information in Medicine in 2003–2009. He has published more than 70 papers
in international peer-reviewed journals, and more than 100 publications in scientific peer-reviewed conferences.

Christine M. Gordon received the M.P.H. degree in
urban health and the B.A. degree in english language
and literature from Northeastern University, Boston,
MA, USA.
She is currently a Project Manager and Research
Coordinator for the Consortium on Technology for
Proactive Care at Northeastern University, an interdisciplinary program in the College of Computer and
Information Science and Bouvé College of Health
Sciences, Boston. The focus of her work is on evaluating wearable and unobtrusive monitoring devices
for tailored intervention development and designing user interfaces that convey meaningful health information through the integration and visualization
of multiple data streams. She has previously worked in research support with
Brigham and Women.s Hospital, Health Resources in Action, and Northeastern
University Colleges of Engineering, all in Boston.

2775

Niilo Saranummi (SM’06–F’09) received the
Dr.Tech. degree in biomedical engineering from the
Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland, in 1976.
He is currently a Research Professor at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Espoo, Finland.
His research interests include personal health systems
and eHealth, and innovation, technology transfer and
technology policy setting in health technologies. He
was the President of the International Federation for
Medical and Biological Engineering (IFMBE) from
1991 to 1994, an International Union for Physical and Engineering Sciences
in medicine from 1994 to 1997, the Interim President of European Alliance
for Medical and Biological Engineering and Science from 2003 to 2004, and
the Chair of the International Academy of Medical and Biological Engineering
from 2009 to 2012.
Dr. Saranummi was the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE TRANSACTIONS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY in biomedicine from 2002 to 2007. He received the
IFMBE.s Otto Schmitt Award in 2006. He is a Fellow of the International
Academy of Medical and Biological Engineering, the American Institute of
Medical and Biological Engineering and Health Level Seven.

