914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

A Simple Model to Estimate Plantarflexor
Muscle–Tendon Mechanics and Energetics During
Walking With Elastic Ankle Exoskeletons
Gregory S. Sawicki∗ and Nabil S. Khan

Abstract—Goal: A recent experiment demonstrated that when
humans wear unpowered elastic ankle exoskeletons with intermediate spring stiffness, they can reduce their metabolic energy
cost to walk by ∼7%. Springs that are too compliant or too stiff
have little benefit. The purpose of this study was to use modeling and simulation to explore the muscle-level mechanisms for
the “sweet spot” in stiffness during exoskeleton assisted walking.
Methods: We developed a simple lumped uniarticular musculoskeletal model of the plantarflexors operating in parallel with an
elastic “exo-tendon.” Using an inverse approach with constrained
kinematics and kinetics, we rapidly simulated human walking over
a range of exoskeleton stiffness values and examined the underlying neuromechanics and energetics of the biological plantarflexors.
Results: Stiffer ankle exoskeleton springs resulted in larger decreases in plantarflexor muscle forces, activations, and metabolic
energy consumption. However, in the process of unloading the compliant biological muscle–tendon unit, the muscle fascicles experienced larger excursions that negatively impacted series elastic
element recoil that is characteristic of a tuned “catapult mechanism.” Conclusion: The combination of disrupted muscle–tendon
dynamics and the need to produce compensatory forces/moments
to maintain overall net ankle moment invariance could explain
the “sweet spot” in metabolic performance at intermediate ankle
exoskeleton stiffness. Future work will aim to provide experimental evidence to support the model predictions presented here using ultrasound imaging of muscle-level dynamics during walking
with elastic ankle exoskeletons. Significance: Engineers must account for the muscle-level effects of exoskeleton designs in order to
achieve maximal performance objectives.
Index Terms—Ankle exoskeleton, computer simulation, elastic
energy storage, energetics, Hill-type muscle model, human walking, metabolic cost, muscle–tendon dynamics, plantarflexors (PF).

I. INTRODUCTION
UMAN walking [4], hopping [5], and running [6] all exhibit compliant dynamics that can be captured by simple
spring–mass models. In essence, the lower limb is able to com-

H

Manuscript received March 6, 2015; revised August 17, 2015; accepted
September 18, 2015. Date of publication October 15, 2015; date of current
version May 19, 2016. The work of G. S. Sawicki was supported by the USIsrael Binational Science Foundation under Grant #2011152 and the National
Institute of Nursing Research of the National Institutes of Health under Grant
#R01NR014756. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ G. S. Sawicki is with the Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering,
North Carolina State University and the University of North Carolina-Chapel
Hill, Raleigh, NC 27695 USA (e-mail: greg_sawicki@ncsu.edu).
N. S. Khan is with Anuva Innovations, Inc.
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 1 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2491224

press and recoil elastically with stiffness that arises from the
combination of passive nonlinear material properties of the
muscles and series elastic connective tissues, and active neuromuscular control. During locomotion, “springy limbs” enable
a number of elastic mechanisms that are exploited to improve
performance. For example, properly timed stretch and recoil of
series elastic tissues can be used to enhance muscle power output
during acceleration, attenuate muscle power requirements during deceleration, or conserve mechanical and metabolic energy
during steady-speed locomotion [7].
The range of performance benefits afforded by compliant
limbs in humans and animals has inspired wearable exoskeletons (EXOs) that may have applications in both gait rehabilitation and augmentation. Recently, a number of lower limb EXOs
have been developed that use elastic elements (i.e., springs and
clutches) in parallel with the limb to strategically store and return energy and help power locomotion [8]–[15]. Physiological
measurements in studies of vertical hopping in elastic EXOs
spanning the whole limb [9], the knee joint [14] and the ankle
joint [10], [12], [20] indicate performance benefits that include
reduced muscle activity, reduced biological limb/joint stiffness
and mechanical power output, and reduced metabolic energy
cost of the user. These studies of simple movements like vertical
hopping have paved the way for the continued development and
implementation of elastic EXOs to improve user performance
during human walking and running gaits.
During human walking, the majority of mechanical power
comes from the ankle plantarflexors (PFs) [21]. Furthermore,
approximately half of the requisite mechanical power output
at the ankle comes from elastic recoil of the Achilles’ tendon
at “push off” [22]. Given the PFs’ primary role in forward
propulsion [23] and the significant elastic mechanism afforded
by their compliant muscle–tendon architecture, the ankle joint
seems to be a logical site for a passive elastic EXO that can
improve human walking performance.
We have recently developed a novel passive elastic ankle EXO
that can store and return energy during the stance phase while
allowing free ankle rotation during the swing phase of walking
[8], [24], [25]. The key feature in the design is a rotary clutch
that uses a ratchet and pawl configuration and two timing pins
set to engage and disengage the EXO spring at set ankle joint
angles. The EXO spring is engaged when the first timing pin
pushes the pawl onto the ratchet at terminal swing, where the
ankle dorsiflexes just prior to heel strike. This enables the spring
to store and return elastic energy during stance. Then, once the
ankle reaches extreme plantarflexion, after the foot is off the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SAWICKI AND KHAN: SIMPLE MODEL TO ESTIMATE PF MUSCLE–TENDON MECHANICS AND ENERGETICS

915

Fig. 1. (a) Modeling schematic. We modeled the combined triceps surae (soleus and gastrocnemius muscles) as a single lumped uniarticular PF (PF m tu )
attached along the shank L S H A N K to the calcaneus with length L P F m t u and moment arm L P F −M A (left). The lumped PF m tu generated force according to
a Hill-type muscle–tendon model with a muscle CE comprising active (F(t), red) and passive (blue parallel spring) components and a series elastic component
(SEE) representing the Achilles’ tendon and aponeurosis. We modeled a passive elastic ankle EXO as a spring in parallel with the PF M T U and acting through
the same moment arm L P F −M A (right). (b) Block diagram of computational flow in the inverse modeling framework used to simulate changes in muscle-level
dynamics during walking with EXOs of varying spring stiffness K E X O . First, using the defined skeletal geometry, the PF moment m P F m t u and ankle joint angle
θA N K L E from normal walking at 1.25 m/s were converted to a PF force, FP F m t u and PF length, L P F m t u , respectively. Then, we used the SEE stiffness, K S E E
to compute SEE length, L S E E ; and the EXO stiffness, K E X O to compute EXO force, FE X O . Next, we could use subtraction to define the force (FC E ), length
(L C E ), and velocity (V C E ), of the muscle. Finally, these values were used along with models of muscle force production and metabolic energy use to compute
muscle activation (Act), mechanical power output (P m e ch ) and metabolic power output (P m e t ).

ground, a second timing pin pushes the pawl off of the ratchet,
allowing the user to freely rotate their foot without interference
from the EXO spring. This EXO design is simple, lightweight
(<500 g), and requires no electronics or battery, making it a
low-cost option for gait assistance. We have recently shown that
users can use this unpowered EXO to reduce their metabolic
cost of walking by ∼7% below normal walking, but only when
the EXO spring (i.e., “exo-tendon”) is not too compliant and not
too stiff [25]. The reasons behind the existence of a “sweet spot”
for ankle EXO stiffness remain unresolved, principally because
it is difficult to experimentally observe the muscle-level effects
of EXO mechanical assistance.
The goal of this study was to develop and employ a simple
in silico modeling tool to aid in the muscle-level understanding of the effects of increasing elastic ankle EXO stiffness on
underlying PF muscle–tendon mechanics and energetics during
walking. Humans tend to reduce their biological ankle moment
contribution in order to maintain consistent overall ankle joint
kinetics during walking with ankle EXOs [11], [25], [29], [30].
In line with this adaptive behavior, it follows that higher EXO
stiffness should result in the increased unloading of biological
muscle–tendons and larger reductions in the metabolic cost of
plantarflexion during walking. On the other hand, if elastic ankle
EXOs get too stiff, costly compensations might arise elsewhere
in the lower limb [31] or locally at the ankle in antagonistic
muscle groups (e.g., tibialis anterior) to maintain steady-gait
mechanics. Furthermore, at the muscle–tendon level, increasing
ankle EXO stiffness could disrupt the normal “catapult mechanism” exhibited by the ankle PFs. That is, as parallel spring
stiffness increases and the EXO takes over more and more
of the PF moment, the Achilles’ tendon should undergo less

stretch requiring larger excursions of the muscles fascicles in
series. Higher muscle shortening velocities are more metabolically costly. Thus, despite lower muscle force/moment requirements, it is possible that unfavorable shifts in force–length or
force–velocity operating point (e.g., higher shorting velocities)
could increase metabolic energy requirements in the PF muscles and offset the potential benefit of increased assistance from
elastic ankle EXOs [20], [32], [33].
To begin to resolve the reasons behind the “sweet spot” in
ankle EXO stiffness, we built a strategically simple musculoskeletal model of a passive elastic ankle EXO working in
parallel with the human ankle PFs [see Fig. 1(a)]. We first used
experimental kinematic and kinetic data from normal walking
without EXOs at 1.25 m/s to identify the best set of morpho bio ) that generated
logical parameters and neural activation (M
“human-like” ankle neuromechanics and energetics (e.g., [18]).
 bio as baseline, and an inverse framework [see
Then with M
Fig. 1(b)], we performed computer simulations to estimate how
changes in ankle EXO stiffness in parallel with the PFs would
impact the underlying biological muscle-level neuromechanics
and energetics.
II. METHODS
A. Model Composition
We constructed a simplified model of the human triceps surae
using a single, lumped, uniarticular ankle PF muscle–tendon
unit (MTU). Within the MTU, there was a Hill-type contractile element (CE), representing the muscle fascicles, and a series elastic element (SEE), representing tendonous tissues (i.e.,
Achilles’ tendon and aponeuroses) [34] [see Fig. 1(a)]. The

916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

extended model also included a spring in parallel with and operating through the same moment arm as the biological MTU
[see Fig. 1(a)] in order to capture the dynamics of an elastic ankle EXO. More details describing mathematical relations used
to model components of the MTU are provided in the online
Supplementary Materials.

TABLE I
 b io SOLUTION
BASELINE MODEL PARAMETERS AND M
Parameter

VALUE (UNITS)
(NORM.)

Source/Details

Body Mass

70 kg

Body Height

1.70 m

Shank Length,
LS H A N K

0.40 m

FC E M A X

6000 N

VC E M A X

0.326 m/s (8.24 x
LC E 0 )

Average mass of subjects from
experimental data set for walking at
1.25 m/s [2]. Within 1 SD of average
subject mass from Ward et al. (82.7 ±
15.2 kg) [3].
Average height of subjects from
experimental data set for walking at
1.25 m/s [2]. Within 1 SD of average
subject height from Ward et al. (168.4
± 9.3 m) [3].
Set 0.03 m greater than tibial length
from Ward et al. (37.1 ± 2.2 cm) [3] to
include distance to femoral condyles.
Similar to approximations for soleus
+ med. and lat. gastrocnemius
muscles used by Arnold et al.
(5500.3 N) [16] and others [17]–[19].
Based on values for soleus and
combined gastrocnemius reported by
Geyer et al. [19] and scaled using
physiological cross section (PCSA)
data from Ward et al. [3].
Based on fascicle lengths for soleus,
med. gastrocnemius and lat.
gastrocnemius reported in Ward et al.
[3] and tendon slack lengths reported
in Arnold et al. [16] and scaled using
physiological cross section (PCSA)
data from Ward et al. [3]

B. Setting Model Parameter Values
We set model parameters describing attachment geometry,
MTU morphology, and muscle (CE) and tendon (SEE) force
production based on the latest anatomical and physiological data
from the literature (e.g., [3], [16]) as well as computer optimization (e.g., [18]) to match model outputs to baseline experimental
walking data (see Table I, unbold and bold, respectively). We
termed this “baseline” lumped muscle model without an EXO
 bio parameter configuration. More details on how we set
the M
parameters are provided in the online Supplementary Materials.
C. Extending the Model to Include an Elastic Ankle EXO
We modified the “baseline” lumped muscle model config bio (see Table I, bold; see Supplementary Materials
ured to M
for more details) to include a passive elastic EXO, represented
by an additional passive elastic element operating in parallel
with and along the same line of action as the lumped PF MTU
[see Fig. 1(a)]. In this configuration, the EXO spring (i.e., exotendon) operated through the same moment arm (∼4.1 cm) as
the PF MTU throughout the stride—a simplification that is convenient for tying the EXO back to parameters of the biological
MTU (i.e., KSEE ) and allows simple conversion to equivalent
effective rotational stiffness values—both features that facilitate
broad generalization to devices with varying geometries.
We modeled the mechanical action of EXO based on the
passive ankle EXO developed by Wiggin et al. which utilizes
a clutch to strategically engage and disengage a coil tension
spring according to kinematic cues based on ankle angle [8],
[24], [25]. The length of the EXO spring always exactly tracked
the length of the lumped PF MTU LPF m t u
LEXO (t) = LPF m t u (t).

(1)

To model the function of the clutch, the effective slack length
of the EXO spring LEXO 0 was set to the MTU length at which
the ankle angle transitioned from plantarflexion into dorsiflexion
shortly after heel strike
LEXO 0 = LPF m t u (t∗ ) where

dθankle ∗
(t )
dt

2

= 0 and

d θankle ∗
(t ) > 0.
dt2

(2)

After this point, the EXO spring stored and released energy
until the second transition from plantarflexion to dorsiflexion,
at which time EXO force generation capability was terminated
(i.e., shortly before swing). EXO force generation was modeled
using a Hookean spring with linear stiffness KEXO
FEXO (t) = KEXO × (LEXO (t) − LEXO 0 ), LEXO > LEXO 0
FEXO (t) = 0,

LEXO < LEXO 0 .

(3)

L C E 0 /L P F m t u 0

0.108 (unitless)

LP F mt u

0.366 m (0.92 ×
LS H A N K )
0.040 m (0.10 ×
LS H A N K )

LCE 0

LSE E 0
K SE E

0

0.326 m (0.82 ×
LS H A N K )
315.4 N/mm

These values (in bold) were all
obtained using an optimization to find
the morphology that would minimize
error between the modeled and
measured PF moment based on
inverse dynamics analysis of human
walking data collected at 1.25 m/s.
See text for details.

The stiffness of the SEE that resulted
in the best match of model and
experimental PF moment is consistent
with values reported for the Achilles’
tendon in the literature from both
models (375.6 N/mm) [18] and
experiments (188–805 N/mm)
[26]–[28].

*
Parameters are all defined in more detail within the text. Bold indicates a parameter
 ); un-bold indicates
set using optimization to match model and experimental data (M
a parameter based on values taken from literature.

D. Inverse Approach to Simulate Walking with Ankle EXOs
Over a Range of Stiffnesses
With the EXO component of the model defined and param bio , we sought to
eters of the lumped biological MTU set to M
examine changes in mechanics and energetics of the biological
MTU during walking with EXO springs ranging 0% to 100%
of the MTU series elastic stiffness KSEE = 315.4 N/mm. This
yielded equivalent EXO rotational stiffness values ranging from
0 N·m/rad (0 N·m/deg) up to 526.7 N·m/rad (9.19 N·m/deg), a
value similar to that observed for the ankle joint in late stance
during normal walking at 1.25 m/s [35].
For these simulations, we used an inverse approach [see
Fig. 1(b)] that conserved ankle joint angle θANKLE , and by
extension, the lumped PF MTU length change LPF m t u (i.e.,

SAWICKI AND KHAN: SIMPLE MODEL TO ESTIMATE PF MUSCLE–TENDON MECHANICS AND ENERGETICS

kinematics) as well as the total PF moment profile mPF t o t a l
 bio solution. First, FEXO was
(i.e., kinetics), generated by the M
calculated for each point in the stride according to (3) and then
converted to mEXO , assuming for simplicity that it followed
the same line of action as the PFs by applying a moment arm
computed from the model’s skeletal geometry (∼4.1 cm on
average). Next, we computed the moment generated by the biological MTUs, mPF m t u (PFs) and mD F m t u (dorsiflexors) using
mPF m t u (t) = mPF t o t a l (t) − mEXO (t),
where mEXO < mPF t o t a l

(4)

and
mDF m t u (t) = mEXO (t) − mPF t o t a l (t),
where mEXO >= mPF t o t a l .
In cases where mEXO was greater than mPF t o t a l (i.e.,
mPF m t u < 0), we set mPF m t u = 0 and assumed that the excess EXO moment (mEXO − mPF t o t a l ) would be compensated
for by a moment from the antagonist muscle compartment (i.e.,
dorsiflexors) mDF m t u to conserve the net ankle joint moment
(see also Section II-E3).
Next, to get at the biological muscle–tendon dynamics, we
converted mPF t o t a l to FPF t o t a l , again using a moment arm computed from the model’s skeletal geometry (∼4.1 cm on average).
Given that all elements of the PF MTU are in series
(5)

we could use FSEE (t) (see (5)) and KSEE to compute LSEE (t)
(see Equations S7, S8). LSEE (t) was then subtracted from
LPF m t u (t) to determine the LCE (t) profile (see Equation S9).
With LCE (t) defined for all points during the stride, we could
compute a time derivative to obtain the muscle fascicle (CE)
velocity VCE (t). Finally, we could use our model for CE force
to back calculate the muscle activation α(t) over the stride given
the known FCE (t) , LCE (t) and VCE (t) (see Equation S1). At
this point, the forces, lengths, and velocities of the EXO, MTU,
SEE, and CE, as well as the activation of the CE were all known
and available to assess the muscle-level mechanical and energetic performance of a given EXO stiffness during assisted
walking.
E. Assessment Metrics for Quantifying EXO Performance at
the Muscle Level
To evaluate the effects of different EXO springs on underlying
PF mechanics and energetics, we calculated mechanical power
of the MTU and its elements (CE and SEE) as well as the
metabolic power of the CE.
1) Mechanical Power: For a given element (MTU, CE, or
SEE), mechanical power (in watts) PM ech (t) was calculated by
taking the product of force and velocity at each time point over
the stride
PM ech (t) = Felem ent (t) ∗ Velem ent (t) .

the mechanical power curves over the stride only in regions with
PM ech > 0

+
+
WM
=
PM
(7)
ech
ech (t) ∗ dt.
2) Metabolic Power: A mathematical model based on isolated muscle experiments was used to estimate the metabolic
energy expenditure by the lumped PF muscles (CE) over the
stride [36], [37] [see (8)–(11)]. The heat generated in each state
of the muscle contraction, including maintenance, shortening,
resting, and activation, are represented in this calculation. The
metabolic power (in watts) PM et (t) is given as
PM et (t) = α (t) ∗ FCE M A X ∗ VCE M A X ∗ fm et (V
CE (t))

mPF m t u = 0

FPF m t u (t) = FSEE (t) = FCE (t)

917

(6)

The total positive mechanical work (in joules) performed by
each element over the stride was also calculated by integrating

(8)

where fm et (V
CE ) represents empirically based heat measures
that have been related to muscle velocity [36]



fm et V
= 0.23 − 0.16e−8 V C E , V
(9)
CE (t)
CE ≥ 0


23 V
CE
fm et V
= 0.01 − 0.11V
, V
CE (t)
CE + 0.06e
CE < 0.
(10)
Total metabolic work (in joules) expended over a stride was
calculated by integrating the metabolic power curves

(11)
WM et = PM et (t) ∗ dt.
3) Compensatory Metabolic Cost: A compensatory
metabolic cost was also calculated for KEXO values in which
EXO forces/moments exceeded total PF forces/moments and
resulted in a compensatory moment from the antagonist muscle
compartment (i.e., dorsiflexors) mDF m t u as per (4). First, we
calculated the stride average metabolic cost per unit moment, C
 bio solution (i.e., the case with
(in J/N·m) for the PFs in the M
no EXO included)

PM et (t) ∗ dt
.
(12)
C=
mPF m t u (t) ∗ dt
Then, to compute the compensatory metabolic cost (in joules),
we integrated and scaled the compensatory dorsiflexor moment
mDF m t u using the constant C

WM etCom p = C ∗ mDF m t u (t) ∗ dt.
(13)
III. RESULTS
EXOs with increasing stiffness developed higher and higher
forces/moments over the period from ∼10% to 60% of the walking stride (see Fig. 2, top). Because the total EXO + biological
PF moment was fixed in all conditions (i.e., invariant net ankle
joint moment constraint), as the EXO contribution to the total
moment increased, the moment generated by lumped PF muscle forces (CE) systematically decreased (see Fig. 2, bottom;
Fig. 3). For the highest EXO stiffnesses (e.g., 0.9 KSEE ), the
EXO moment greatly exceeded the lumped PF moment necessary to maintain an invariant net ankle moment, especially early
in the stride cycle. In these cases, a compensatory moment from

918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 3. Peak force versus EXO spring stiffness for the total = EXO + lumped
PFs (solid black), EXO only (dashed black), and the active (solid red) and
passive (solid purple) elements of the lumped PF muscles (CE). For each EXO
stiffness, all forces are normalized to the peak total force (∼3200 N) without an
EXO. EXO spring stiffness of 100% K S E E is equivalent to ∼527 N·m/rad.

Fig. 2. Total contribution to ankle joint moment from the lumped PFs and the
elastic ankle EXO (biological + EXO) (Top, black) and the moment generated
by the EXO (EXO only) (Top, gray) over a walking stride from heel strike (0%)
to heel strike (100%) for different EXO spring stiffnesses. The total moment is
always the same because we constrained the model to follow the PF contribution
 b io solution) in all
to net ankle moment during unassisted walking (i.e., M
conditions. The active (Bottom, red) and passive (Bottom, purple) lumped PF
muscle (CE) moment (i.e., biological only) for different EXO spring stiffnesses.
For EXO springs >0.2 K S E E , the EXO moment exceeds the total moment
and necessitates a compensatory antagonist moment from dorsiflexors (Bottom,
shaded area = difference between orange curves and solid red curve) to maintain
an invariant net ankle moment. Curves are plotted for EXO stiffness values
ranging from 0.2 K S E E (∼105 N·m/rad) to 0.9 K S E E (∼474 N·m/rad).

antagonist muscles (e.g., dorsiflexors) was needed to maintain
the net ankle force/moment from walking without an EXO (see
Fig. 2, bottom). In addition, for stiffnesses above ∼0.5 KSEE
(263 N·m/rad), the lumped PF muscle (CE) produced some passive force/moment (see Fig. 2, bottom; Fig. 3).
Lumped PF muscle fascicles (CE) underwent larger excursions during stance phase (∼10%–60% stride) with increasing
EXO spring stiffness (see Fig. 4). Because the ankle joint angle profile was conserved across all conditions, increasing EXO
forces served to reduce the force and strain in the SEE which,

Fig. 4. Lumped PF muscle fascicle (CE) strain over a walking stride from
heel strike (0%) to heel strike (100%) for different EXO spring stiffnesses. The
solid red line is the fascicle strain pattern taken from Rubenson et al. [1] for
 b io solution. Curves are plotted for EXO stiffness values ranging from 0.2
M
K S E E (∼105 N·m/rad) to 0.9 K S E E (∼474 N·m/rad).

in turn, resulted in increased CE length changes (and CE velocities) with increasing EXO stiffness. In fact, LCE surpassed
LCE 0 (strain > 1.0) for KEXO >∼ 0.5 KSEE , and resulted in
passive force generation. CE strain values reached ∼1.15 for
the stiffest EXO springs.
As EXO spring stiffness (KEXO ) increased, mechanical
power/work generated by the lumped PF MTU decreased linearly due to systematic decreases in biological forces/moments
(see Fig. 5, top; Fig. 6). As expected, the power/work performed by the CE was approximately equal in magnitude to
the power/work performed by the SEE for the condition without an EXO. As KEXO increased, the mechanical power/work
generated by the muscle fascicles (CE) and series elastic tissues (SEE) both decreased, but the SEE well outpaced the CE
leaving the CE as the dominant contributor to overall MTU

SAWICKI AND KHAN: SIMPLE MODEL TO ESTIMATE PF MUSCLE–TENDON MECHANICS AND ENERGETICS

919

Fig. 6. Positive mechanical work versus EXO spring stiffness for the lumped
PF muscle fascicles (CE) (red), elastic tissues (SEE) (blue), and MTU (green).
EXO spring stiffness of 100% K S E E is equivalent to ∼527 N·m/rad.

Lumped PF muscle (CE) activation and metabolic
power/work both decreased with increasing EXO stiffness
(KEXO ) (see Fig. 7). Metabolic cost decreased more slowly
than muscle activation with increasing EXO stiffness (see Fig. 7,
bottom left) because the higher CE velocities associated with
stiffer EXO springs required more activation to achieve similar force levels. That is, with higher EXO spring stiffness,
CE force/unit activation decreases due to unfavorable force–
velocity effects. Although increasing KEXO sharply reduced
the metabolic cost of the lumped PFs, the metabolic cost of
compensatory forces/moments needed to maintain an invariant
net ankle moment sharply increased with increasing KEXO (see
Fig. 7, bottom right). As a result, the total metabolic cost had
a minimum at KEXO =∼ 0.7 KEXO (∼369 N·m/rad) and was
∼30% lower than the cost of ankle muscle activity for normal
walking without EXOs.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 5. Mechanical power over a walking stride from heel strike (0%) to
heel strike (100%) for the lumped PF MTU (Top, green); elastic tissues (SEE)
(Middle, blue) and muscle fascicles (CE) (Bottom, red). Curves with varying
line types represent different EXO stiffness values ranging from no EXO (bold)
up 0.9 K S E E (∼474 N·m/rad).

power/work for EXOs with KEXO >∼ 0.1 KSEE (see Fig. 6). In
fact, CE power/work did not decrease for KEXO <∼ 0.2 KEXO
(∼105 N·m/rad), as reduced CE forces traded-off with increased
CE velocities/excursions (see Fig. 4) keeping CE power/work
relatively constant. For KEXO > 0.2, reductions in force began
to dominate the increases in velocity and CE power/work began
to sharply decline (see Fig. 6).

The goal of this study was to employ a strategically simple
musculoskeletal model of an elastic ankle EXO working in parallel with the biological PFs to determine how EXO stiffness
would influence the neuromechanics and energetics of the underlying MTUs during walking. We hypothesized that increasing EXO stiffness would result in (1) increased unloading of biological muscle–tendons and larger reductions in the metabolic
cost of the PFs during walking. Furthermore, we surmised that if
EXOs got too stiff, (2) costly compensations might arise in other
muscles in order to maintain steady-gait mechanics. Finally, at
the muscle–tendon level, we hypothesized that (3) despite lower
biological force/moment requirements due to EXO assistance,
it was possible that the unfavorable changes in muscle operating length and/or higher muscle shortening velocities due to a
disrupted “catapult mechanism” early in the stance phase of the
stride could increase metabolic energy requirements in the PF
muscles and offset some of the potential benefit of increased
assistance from elastic ankle EXOs. Our modeling results

920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 7. (Top) Lumped PF muscle fascicle (CE) activation (Top left) and metabolic power (Top right) over a walking stride from heel strike (0%) to heel strike
 b io solution). Curves of varying line type represent
(100%) for different EXO spring stiffnesses. The solid red lines represent walking without an EXO (i.e., the M
EXO stiffness values ranging from 0.2 K S E E (∼105 N·m/rad) to 0.9 K S E E (∼474 N·m/rad). (Bottom) Integrated activation (Left, dashed) and metabolic power
(i.e., work) (Left, solid) versus EXO spring stiffness for the lumped PF muscle fascicles (CE). Integrated metabolic power (Right, red) is modified (Right, black)
to include an estimated compensatory metabolic cost (Right, dashed gray) due to the antagonist dorsiflexor muscle moment required to maintain an invariant net
ankle moment. All values are normalized to the no EXO condition. EXO spring stiffness of 100% K S E E is equivalent to ∼527 N·m/rad.

support all of these hypotheses and suggest potential musclelevel mechanisms behind the recently observed “sweet spot” in
elastic ankle EXO stiffness [25] that must now be confirmed
with follow-up experiments using ultrasound imaging.
As expected, stiffer ankle EXO springs resulted in larger decreases in PF metabolic energy consumption. Humans seem to
employ a motor control strategy in order to maintain relatively
invariant net ankle joint moments during locomotion with mechanical assistance from ankle exoskeletal devices [10]–[12],
[15], [20], [25], [29], [30]. To capture the phenomenon of kinetic invariance in humans, we employed a modeling framework
that enforced both the ankle angle and PF contribution to net
ankle joint moment using experimental data from normal walking at 1.25 m/s. Not surprisingly, solutions with kinetic invariance demonstrated that increasing KEXO yields a clear tradeoff
between EXO and biological muscle forces, with a ∼50/50%
sharing at KEXO =∼ 0.3 KSEE (∼158 N·m/rad = 2.8 N·m/deg)
(see Fig. 3). In addition, solutions with higher KEXO required
muscle activation with lesser magnitude and later onset (see
Fig. 7, top left), a result consistent with recent experimental data

showing decreases in soleus activity that are more pronounced
with higher EXO springs stiffness [25]. We note, without this
timing shift, the lumped PF muscles (CE) would have produced
unnecessary forces/moments between ∼10% and 60% of the
stride when EXO assistance mEXO was already sufficient (see
Fig. 2). Thus, in line with our hypothesis (1), as the biological
force/moment requirement declined with increasing KEXO , so
did muscle activation, which was the main driver of metabolic
cost (see Fig. 7),
Metabolic cost of the PFs reached a minimum value of ∼11%
of the value during unassisted walking (50.3 J ∗ 0.11 = 5.5 J per
leg) with a KEXO of ∼0.8 KSEE (∼421 N·m/rad = 7.4 N·m/deg)
(see Fig. 7, bottom right). But, is more necessarily better when
it comes to ankle EXO stiffness selection [25], [33], [38]? Interestingly, in our model, assisting with a KEXO ≥∼ 0.5 KSEE
(263 N·m/rad) began to induce passive stretch in the muscle
fascicles (CE) and, thus, a passive muscle moment contribution.
While relying more on passive contributions to muscle force
could have metabolic benefit, it also elicits an unavoidable deviation in the ankle force/moment profile from normal walking

SAWICKI AND KHAN: SIMPLE MODEL TO ESTIMATE PF MUSCLE–TENDON MECHANICS AND ENERGETICS

(see Figs. 2 and 3). Thus, due to shifts in the operating point
of underlying muscles to longer lengths (see Fig. 4), perfectly
conserving the mPF t o t a l may become increasingly difficult, and
could be a factor that limits performance for EXOs employing
high parallel stiffness [11], [25], [31].
If humans choose to move with very strict ankle moment invariance, our model suggests that they may reject EXOs with
stiffness ࣙ 0.5 KSEE (or ∼50–60% of normal ankle joint
rotational stiffness during walking at 1.25 m/s [35]), where
passive forces in PFs are unavoidable. This could severely
limit the potential for metabolic savings to only ∼60% of the
total PF contribution or ∼15% overall [39]. Solutions with
KEXO ≥ 0.5 KSEE (263 N·m/rad) begin to significantly produce excess EXO forces/moments early in the stance phase (see
Fig. 2). To maintain net ankle moment invariance, these excess
moments would need to be countered by significant antagonist
moments coming from ankle dorsiflexors or adjustments in posture, both of which would likely incur a compensatory metabolic
cost (see Fig. 7, lower right). Thus, a 15% reduction in overall
metabolic cost of walking seems a high end estimate.
Interestingly, when adding in our estimate for the metabolic
cost of compensatory force/moment of ankle antagonists (i.e.,
dorsiflexors), our model predicts a broad “sweet spot” between
KEXO = 0.6 and 0.8 KSEE (∼316–420 N·m/rad) with a net
metabolic benefit of ∼30% for the ankle PFs. Using Umberger’s
estimate that PFs account for ∼27% of the total metabolic cost
of walking [39], [40], this is equivalent to an overall reduction
in the metabolic cost of walking of ∼8% and falls very near
to the measured value of Collins et al. [25], albeit at a higher
range of EXO stiffness. Collins et al. found the “sweet spot” at
180 N·m/rad, about half the stiffness for the metabolic minimum
reported here. The mismatch is likely due to the very rudimentary approach we took to the compensatory metabolic cost in
this study, which assumed dorsiflexors and PFs have the same
metabolic cost per unit moment [C in (13)] and did not account
for the metabolic cost of compensation elsewhere in the body
(e.g., increased knee flexor moments).
Despite the mismatch in the “sweet spot” stiffness between
our model and experiments, our results still lend some support
to hypothesis (2) that metabolically costly compensation may
be at play to maintain invariant net ankle moment in the face of
increasing EXO spring stiffness, an idea that is also corroborated
by data from Collins et al. [25] indicating both local and global
neuromechanical compensations during walking with parallel
springs. At the ankle, compensation appears as elevated tibialis
anterior muscle activity in early stance and late swing. More
globally, increased knee joint moments appear near the stanceswing transition—an effect not captured by the current model.
Despite the potential for significant metabolic savings due to
reduced muscle forces and activations (see Figs. 2, 3, and 7),
our results also support hypothesis (3) that elastic ankle EXOs
could significantly disrupt the normal “catapult action” of the
PFs during human walking. Our model of normal walking at
1.25 m/s (i.e., KEXO = 0) captures the normal muscle–tendon
interaction dynamics of the PFs and Achilles’ tendon during
walking with nearly isometric muscle fascicles during stance
phase (see Fig. 4, bold red) and large amounts of elastic energy

921

storage and return in series elastic tissues (see Fig. 5, middle,
bold blue) [22], [41]. This results in a large burst of mechanical power at push-off that is shared ∼50/50 between muscle
fascicles (CE) and series elastic tissues (SEE) (see Figs. 5 and
6) [22]. However, as KEXO increases, unloading of the biological MTU causes less and less stretch in the SEE and more and
more stretch in the CE, disrupting the normal “catapult-like”
muscle–tendon interaction (see Figs. 4–6).
The observation of larger CE excursions with parallel mechanical assistance is consistent with recent muscle-level experiments during spring-loaded human hopping. Soleus fascicles
undergo increased excursions in the presence of a parallel spring
(KEXO = 91 N · m/rad) providing assistive PF torque [20]. In
that case, reduced forces were counteracted by increased length
changes resulting in no difference in soleus muscle fascicle work
between spring-loaded and unassisted hopping conditions. Our
model of spring-loaded walking makes a similar prediction that
CE work does not decrease for values of KEXO up to ∼0.2
KSEE (∼ 105 N·m/rad = 1.8 N·m/deg) (see Fig. 6). For EXO
stiffness values > 0.2 KSEE , CE work begins to decline as reductions in muscle force outpace increases in CE length changes.
Perhaps more striking is the rapid reduction in the mechanical work performed by the SEE recoil with increasing EXO
spring stiffness. Without assistance from the EXO, the SEE recoil contributes an equal amount of mechanical power as CE
shortening, but the SEE contribution is reduced to nearly zero
for KEXO ≥ 0.7 KSEE (∼369 N·m/rad), completely eliminating the ability of the biological MTU to function as a catapult
(see Fig. 6).
Increasing reliance on the CE for MTU power production
limits the metabolic benefit of increasing EXO spring stiffness.
The lack of mechanical power from elastic recoil of the SEE is
mostly supplanted by elastic recoil of the EXO spring, but not
without some consequence. Our metabolic cost model is driven
by muscle activation, force–length, and force–velocity dynamics [36] [see (8)–(11)]. As EXO spring stiffness increases, the
required muscle activation declines because biological muscle
force requirements are reduced. We note, however, that for the
stiffest EXOs, reductions in metabolic cost occur at a slower
rate than reductions in muscle activation (see Fig. 7, bottom
left). This is a direct side effect of the metabolic penalty associated with higher CE shortening velocities due to the increased
muscle excursions characteristic of a disrupted “catapult action”
(see Fig. 4). Interestingly, because muscle fascicles nominally
operate down the ascending limb (see Fig. 4, red bold curve),
EXO assistance tends to increase average fascicle lengths toward LCEo , an operating point that is more favorable for force
production—an effect that is trumped by far less favorable
force–velocity operating points. Thus, in general, it would seem
that EXOs designed to assist MTUs with compliant architecture
may be inherently limited in their metabolic benefit. One way
out of this conundrum might be for the user to adjust their joint
kinematics (and, therefore, MTU length change pattern) in order
to attenuate increases in underlying fascicle velocity that counteract the metabolic reductions due to reduced muscle forces
and activations [20]. Indeed, altered joint kinematics indicative
of shorter MTU lengths (i.e., exaggerated plantarflexion) have

922

been observed during walking with powered ankle orthoses [2],
[29], [30]—a strategy that may limit metabolic penalty due to a
disrupted “catapult mechanism.”
Aside from improving metabolic performance of the user,
exaggerated plantar flexion during walking with an ankle EXO
could be indicative of an injury avoidance mechanism. Although
nonintuitive, walking with relatively stiff EXO springs could
induce passive stretch at high rates in the CE and increase the
likelihood of a muscle strain injury [42]. In our simulations, the
CE strain reached maximum values of ∼115% for the stiffest
EXO spring (see Fig. 4), but for tasks where the MTU operates
at longer lengths and/or faster velocities (e.g., faster walking
or walking uphill), it is possible that strains/strain rates might
reach dangerous levels with relatively stiff EXOs (e.g., KEXO >
0.9% KSEE = 475 N · m/rad).
A. Model Limitations
We made a number of simplifications and assumptions in developing the model and simulations used in this study that are
worth addressing. First and foremost, we greatly simplified the
attachment geometry, muscle–tendon architecture, and mechanisms driving force production in our musculoskeletal model
of the triceps surae [i.e., medial gastrocnemius (MG), lateral
gastrocnemius (LG) and soleus (SOL)]. Briefly, we combined
the triceps surae group into a single, “lumped” uniarticular
muscle–tendon with a soleus like origin and insertion locations,
but with a force generating capacity of the summed MG + LG +
SOL. Despite its simplicity, we believe that the model captures
the salient features and behaviors exhibited by the human PFs
during walking that are relevant to the questions we address in
this study.
The inverse modeling framework we employed assumed that
the overall ankle joint kinematics and kinetics during walking at 1.25 m/s remain invariant in the context of elastic ankle
EXOs. While there is strong evidence that humans do indeed
exhibit invariance in ankle joint moments during walking [11],
[25], [29], [30], the evidence for ankle joint angle invariance is
weaker. For example, Kao et al. demonstrated that while ankle
kinetics are conserved when some PF moment is provided by
a robotic EXO, ankle kinematics tend to shift to more plantarflexed postures [29]. This finding has been corroborated by
others who use ankle EXOs during human walking studies [2],
[30]. We note that it is entirely possible that the devices used in
previous studies were not properly “tuned” to reproduce both
ankle kinetics and kinematics during the studied gait pattern.
In fact, our study strongly suggests that assistive devices that
are not properly “tuned” could lead to deviations from normal
moments (see Fig. 3) unless the user significantly adjusts their
joint kinematics and/or muscle activation patterns (see Fig. 7).
On the other hand, it may be that the conditions we simulated, maintaining kinematic and kinetic invariance, are not the
best strategy for minimizing the metabolic cost. A gait pattern
with more plantarflexed posture or a higher total net PF moment
may be able to better optimize the tradeoff between the energy savings from reduced PF forces/muscle activations and the
additional energy costs of altered movement at other places in
the body (e.g., knee or hip).

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 5, MAY 2016

To address these open questions, our future work will aim
toward a more complete model with more detailed anatomy and
physiology that incorporates all of the individual ankle joint
muscle–tendons and the rest of the lower limb as along with
an elastic ankle EXO (e.g., [32] for hopping) during human
waking. We will use our inverse framework, but drive the simulations with actual kinematic and kinetic data from walking with
elastic EXOs with varying spring stiffness (e.g., [25]) rather than
imposing invariant constraints as we did in this study. Comparing and contrasting the fully constrained model presented here,
with a model driven by “real-world” EXO walking data will
provide important insights into the muscle-level mechanisms
that may be guiding human preference during locomotion with
EXO assistance. We also plan to use ultrasound imaging to verify the model predictions of underlying fascicle behavior during
EXO-assisted walking. Indeed, a grand challenge in the field
of wearable robotics is to develop a modeling and simulation
framework that does not rely at all on imposed kinematic or kinetic constraints (from data or otherwise) to predict how walking
mechanics and energetics would change in the context of novel
devices.
B. Insights Into Improving Current Ankle EXO Designs
In this study, we have highlighted a number of limitations
inherent in passive elastic EXO designs [8], [24] that may be
overcome with improvements in future designs. The primary
drawback to the device we simulated was that it produced
forces too early in the stance phase that often exceeded those
needed to produce a normal ankle joint moment. This effect was
particularly noticeable as the EXO spring stiffness increased
(see Figs. 2 and 3). With the current design, avoiding this
excess EXO moment would require either 1) a change in ankle
joint kinematics, or 2) coactivation by ankle dorsiflexors to
adjust the net ankle moment downward, or 3) walking with
excessive total ankle joint moments—all of which could be
considered undesirable effects. Changes in the EXO design
could also improve performance. For example, a passive device
with nonlinear spring stiffness (i.e., a stiffening spring), and/or
a changing moment arm could be designed with a custom
torque angle curve appropriate for a given gait. In addition,
timing engagement of the spring with a more versatile clutching
mechanism could provide flexibility in when the EXO torque
onset occurs during a gait cycle. Of course, a device with
motors could achieve all of the aforementioned performance
features by employing customized gait-phase-dependent torque
control that is optimized to maximize metabolic benefit while
maintaining joint kinetics and kinematics.
V. CONCLUSION
Our modeling results and recent experimental evidence [25]
both indicate that for devices intended to reduce the metabolic
cost of human locomotion by assisting compliant joints (e.g.,
ankle), the name of the game is to reduce muscle forces and
activations. This idea represents somewhat of a paradigm shift
from previous solutions focusing on reducing biological muscletendon/joint positive mechanical power outputs [30], [43], [44],
especially in late stance phase. Passive elastic solutions are a

SAWICKI AND KHAN: SIMPLE MODEL TO ESTIMATE PF MUSCLE–TENDON MECHANICS AND ENERGETICS

promising alternative as they are well suited for reducing muscle
force and activation requirements in parallel biological MTUs
even during periods of energy absorption [25].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank G. Lichtwark and J. Rubenson
for helpful discussions regarding the choice of model parameters, and S. Collins for crucial feedback on the approach.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Rubenson et al., “On the ascent: The soleus operating length is conserved
to the ascending limb of the force-length curve across gait mechanics in
humans,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 215, no. Pt 20, pp. 3539–3551, Oct. 15,
2012.
[2] G. S. Sawicki and D. P. Ferris, “Mechanics and energetics of level walking with powered ankle exoskeletons,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 211, no. Pt 9,
pp. 1402–1413, May 2008.
[3] S. R. Ward et al., “Are current measurements of lower extremity muscle
architecture accurate?” Clin. Orthopaedics Relat. Res., vol. 467, no. 4,
pp. 1074–1082, Apr. 2009.
[4] H. Geyer et al., “Compliant leg behaviour explains basic dynamics of
walking and running,” Proc. Biol. Sci., vol. 273, no. 1603, pp. 2861–2867,
Nov. 22, 2006.
[5] C. T. Farley et al., “Hopping frequency in humans: A test of how springs
set stride frequency in bouncing gaits,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 71, no. 6,
pp. 2127–2132, Dec. 1991.
[6] R. Blickhan, “The spring-mass model for running and hopping,” J.
Biomech., vol. 22, nos. 11/12, pp. 1217–1227, 1989.
[7] T. J. Roberts and E. Azizi, “Flexible mechanisms: The diverse roles
of biological springs in vertebrate movement,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 214,
no. Pt 3, pp. 353–361, Feb. 1, 2011.
[8] M. B. Wiggin et al., “An exoskeleton using controlled energy storage
and release to aid ankle propulsion,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf.
Rehabilitation Robotics, Zurich Switzerland, 2011, vol. 2011, p. 5975342.
[9] A. M. Grabowski and H. M. Herr, “Leg exoskeleton reduces the metabolic
cost of human hopping,” J Appl. Physiol., vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 670–678,
Sep. 2009.
[10] D. J. Farris and G. S. Sawicki, “Linking the mechanics and energetics
of hopping with elastic ankle exoskeletons,” J Appl. Physiol., vol. 113,
no. 12, pp. 1862–1872, Dec. 15, 2012.
[11] D. J. Bregman et al., “Spring-like ankle foot orthoses reduce the energy
cost of walking by taking over ankle work,” Gait Posture, vol. 35, no. 1,
pp. 148–153, Jan, 2012.
[12] D. P. Ferris et al., “Neuromechanical adaptation to hopping with an elastic
ankle-foot orthosis,” J Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 163–170, Jan.
2006.
[13] G. Elliott et al., “The biomechanics and energetics of human running using
an elastic knee exoskeleton,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabilitation Robotics, Seattle, WA, USA, Jun. 2013, vol. 2013, p. 6650418.
[14] M. S. Cherry et al., “Design and fabrication of an elastic knee orthosis: Preliminary results,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Mech. Robot. Conf., 2006,
pp. 565–573.
[15] Y. H. Chang et al., “Intralimb compensation strategy depends on the
nature of joint perturbation in human hopping,” J. Biomech., vol. 41, no. 9,
pp. 1832–1839, 2008.
[16] E. M. Arnold et al., “A model of the lower limb for analysis of human
movement,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 269–279, Feb. 2010.
[17] G. A. Lichtwark and A. M. Wilson, “Is achilles tendon compliance optimised for maximum muscle efficiency during locomotion?” J. Biomech.,
vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 1768–1775, 2007.
[18] P. Krishnaswamy et al., “Human leg model predicts ankle muscle-tendon
morphology, state, roles and energetics in walking,” PLoS Comput. Biol.,
vol. 7, no. 3, art. no. e1001107 (16 pages), Mar. 2011.
[19] H. Geyer and H. Herr, “A muscle-reflex model that encodes principles of
legged mechanics produces human walking dynamics and muscle activities,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 263–273,
Jun. 2010.
[20] D. J. Farris et al., “Elastic ankle exoskeletons reduce soleus muscle force
but not work in human hopping,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 115, no. 5,
pp. 579–585, Sep. 1, 2013.

923

[21] D. J. Farris and G. S. Sawicki, “The mechanics and energetics of human
walking and running: A joint level perspective,” J. Roy. Soc. Interface,
vol. 9, no. 66, pp. 110–118, Jan. 7, 2012.
[22] D. J. Farris and G. S. Sawicki, “Human medial gastrocnemius forcevelocity behavior shifts with locomotion speed and gait,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 977–982, Jan. 17, 2012.
[23] J. S. Gottschall and R. Kram, “Energy cost and muscular activity required for propulsion during walking,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 94, no. 5,
pp. 1766–1772, May 2003.
[24] M. B. Wiggin et al., “Apparatus and clutch for using controlled storage and release of mechanical energy to aid locomotion,” U.S. Patent
20 130 046 218, Feb. 21, 2013.
[25] S. H. Collins et al., “Reducing the energy cost of human walking using
an unpowered exoskeleton,” Nature, vol. 522, no. 7555, pp. 212–215, Jun.
11, 2015.
[26] G. A. Lichtwark and A. M. Wilson, “In vivo mechanical properties of
the human Achilles tendon during one-legged hopping,” J. Exp. Biol.,
vol. 208, no. Pt 24, pp. 4715–4725, Dec. 2005.
[27] K. Albracht and A. Arampatzis, “Exercise-induced changes in triceps
surae tendon stiffness and muscle strength affect running economy in
humans,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 1605–1615, Jun.
2013.
[28] L. Houghton et al., “Achilles tendon mechanical properties after both
prolonged continuous running and prolonged intermittent shuttle running
in cricket batting,” J. Appl. Biomech., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 453–462, Aug.
2013.
[29] P. C. Kao et al., “Invariant ankle moment patterns when walking with
and without a robotic ankle exoskeleton,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, no. 2,
pp. 203–209, Jan. 19, 2010.
[30] P. Malcolm et al., “A simple exoskeleton that assists plantarflexion can
reduce the metabolic cost of human walking,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 2,
art. no e56137 (7 pages), 2013.
[31] D. J. Bregman et al., “The effect of ankle foot orthosis stiffness on the
energy cost of walking: A simulation study,” Clin. Biomech. (Bristol,
Avon), vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 955–961, Nov. 2011.
[32] D. J. Farris et al., “Musculoskeletal modelling deconstructs the paradoxical effects of elastic ankle exoskeletons on plantar-flexor mechanics and
energetics during hopping,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 217, pp. 4018–4028, Oct.
2, 2014.
[33] B. D. Robertson, D. J. Farris, and G. S. Sawicki, “More is not always better:
Modeling the effects of elastic exoskeleton compliance on underlying
ankle muscle-tendon dynamics,” Bioinspir. Biomim., vol. 9, no. 4, art. no.
046018 (11 pages), Dec. 2014.
[34] F. E. Zajac, “Muscle and tendon: Properties, models, scaling, and application to biomechanics and motor control,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 359–411, 1989.
[35] K. Shamaei et al., “Estimation of quasi-stiffness and propulsive work of
the human ankle in the stance phase of walking,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 3,
art. no. e59935 (12 pages), 2013.
[36] R. M. Alexander, “Optimum muscle design for oscillatory movements,”
J. Theor. Biol., vol. 184, no. 3, pp. 253–259, Feb. 7, 1997.
[37] A. E. Minetti and R. M. Alexander, “A theory of metabolic costs for
bipedal gaits,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 186, no. 4, pp. 467–476, Jun. 21, 1997.
[38] B. D. Robertson and G. S. Sawicki, “Exploiting elasticity: Modeling the
influence of neural control on mechanics and energetics of ankle muscletendons during human hopping,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 353, pp. 121–132,
Jul. 21, 2014.
[39] B. R. Umberger and J. Rubenson, “Understanding muscle energetics in
locomotion: New modeling and experimental approaches,” Exercise Sport
Sci. Rev., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 59–67, Apr. 2011.
[40] B. R. Umberger, “Stance and swing phase costs in human walking,”
J. Roy. Soc. Interface, vol. 7, no. 50, pp. 1329–1340, Sep. 6, 2010.
[41] M. Ishikawa et al., “Muscle-tendon interaction elastic energy usage human
walking,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 99, pp. 603–608, 2005.
[42] W. E. Garrett, Jr., “Muscle strain injuries: Clinical and basic aspects,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 436–443, Aug.
1990.
[43] L. M. Mooney et al., “Autonomous exoskeleton reduces metabolic cost
of human walking,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 11, art. no. 151 (5 pages),
2014.
[44] G. S. Sawicki et al., “It pays to have a spring in your step,” Exercise Sport
Sci. Rev., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 130–138, Jul. 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

