228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Gait Characteristics When Walking on Different
Slippery Walkways
Mariah W. Whitmore∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Levi J. Hargrove, Member, IEEE, and Eric J. Perreault, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: This study sought to determine the changes
in muscle activity about the ankle, knee, and hip in able-bodied
people walking at steady state on surfaces with different degrees
of slipperiness. Methods: Muscle activity was measured through
electromyographic signals from selected lower limb muscles and
quantified to directly compare changes across surface conditions.
Results: Our results showed distinct changes in the patterns of
muscle activity controlling each joint. Muscles controlling the ankle showed a significant reduction in activity as the surface became
more slippery, presumably resulting in a compliant distal joint to
facilitate full contact with the surface. Select muscles about the
knee and hip showed a significant increase in activity as the surface became more slippery. This resulted in increased knee and
hip flexion likely contributing to a lowering of the body’s center of
mass and stabilization of the proximal leg and trunk. Conclusion:
These findings suggest a proximal-distal gradient in the control of
muscle activity that could inform the future design of adaptable
prosthetic controllers. Significance: Walking on a slippery surface
is extremely difficult, especially for individuals with lower limb
amputations because current prostheses do not allow the compensatory changes in lower limb dynamics that occur involuntarily
in unimpaired subjects. With recent advances in prosthetic control, there is the potential to provide some of these compensatory
changes; however, we first need to understand how able-bodied individuals modulate their gait under these challenging conditions.
Index Terms—Electromyography, gait, limb impedance, prosthetic limbs, slippery surfaces.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE ability to change gait patterns when encountering different walking conditions is critical for minimizing the
risk of falls. This is especially true when walking on a slippery surface, where falling carries a high risk of fracture [1].

T

Manuscript received July 1, 2015; revised September 22, 2015 and October
26, 2015; accepted October 27, 2015. Date of publication October 27, 2015;
date of current version December 17, 2015. This work was supported in part
by the U.S. Army’s Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center
under Grant 81XWH-09-2-0020, and in part by the Department of Defense Joint
Warfighter project under Grant W81XWH-14-C-0105. This paper was awarded
at Neural Engineering 2015, and was supported by the Labex NUMEV under
Grant ANR-10-LABX-20. Financial support for travel to the conference was
provided by the National Science Foundation grant to support Excellence in
Neural Engineering (DM Durand PI). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. W. Whitmore is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA, and also with the Center for Bionic
Medicine, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611 USA (e-mail:
mariahwhitmore@u.northwestern.edu).
L. J. Hargrove is with the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University, and also with the Center for Bionic Medicine,
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago.
E. J. Perreault is with the Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University, and also with the
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2497659

Lower limb amputees are highly susceptible to falls; the prevalence of falls in this population may actually be higher than that
for community-dwelling elderly people [2]. In addition, many
lower limb amputees are also elderly [3], which compounds the
likelihood of a fall. Lower limb amputees have indicated the
importance of being able to ambulate on slippery surfaces [4],
but the degree to which they can alter their gait on slippery surfaces is constrained by the inability of prosthetic limbs to adapt
in the manner of an intact leg. Determining how able-bodied
individuals adapt their legs to walk on slippery surfaces is the
first step toward the design of lower limb prostheses that reduce
the likelihood of slips.
Gait changes that occur when able-bodied people react to or
anticipate stepping onto a single slippery spot have been studied
extensively [5]–[10]. With a priori knowledge, subjects proactively alter their gait dynamics to reduce slip potential. Increased
lower limb muscle activity, including an increase in muscle cocontraction about the ankle and knee has been observed at heel
contact [7], [11]. This increased cocontraction likely increases
joint impedance and stability [12], an observation that is relevant
to the development of biomimetic impedance-based control systems for lower limb prostheses [13] that promote more natural
gait patterns [14]. When impedance parameters cannot be easily
obtained, such as for walking on slippery surfaces, muscle activity, measured through electromyographic (EMG) signals, can
be used as a first approximation of changes in joint mechanics
[15].
Almost all previous slipping studies have focused on the
changes occurring at the ankle and knee when interacting with
discrete areas of extreme slipperiness. The steady-state changes
that occur across the entire limb when walking continuously
on a slippery walkway have not been completely quantified.
One previous study investigated the initial adaptation to a simulated icy walkway [11]. They sought to understand how subjects
adapt to a slippery walkway, rather than capturing the adapted
changes that enable subjects to walk without slipping. As such,
few trials were collected with gait speed minimally controlled
and there was no quantitative comparison of EMG magnitude.
Studying only extreme conditions resembling ice provides minimal information about how people walk on commonly encountered, moderately slippery surfaces, such as smooth hardwood
or tile. These surfaces may not seem as dangerous, yet they
are encountered more frequently than icy surfaces. While some
studies have looked at gait on moderately slippery surfaces,
including walking in socks on linoleum floors [16] and over
a sheet of Teflon [17], to our knowledge no quantification of
EMG or joint kinematics has been done on these surfaces.
With most slipping studies using a simulated icy surface, it is

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WHITMORE et al.: GAIT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN WALKING ON DIFFERENT SLIPPERY WALKWAYS

Fig. 1. Laminate flooring for NS and MS walkways (left) and lubricated
plastic sheeting for VS walkway (right).

interesting that minimal work has been done on changes at the
hip, because often the most perceptible result of walking over
ice is subsequent soreness in the hips. The main study that
considered hip contributions to walking on an extremely slippery surface reported that lateral hip oscillations were reduced
as subjects adapted to the conditions, but did not address the
changes in muscle activity [11]. Another study that monitored
hip muscle activity did so during reactions to unexpected slips,
rather than capturing the proactive changes that aid in avoiding
a slip [18]. The relative contribution of the hip muscles to safe
ambulation on slippery surfaces is important to understand, as
the majority of lower limb amputations occur at the transtibial
(above ankle) or transfemoral (above knee) level [19], thus hip
muscles are available in most lower limb amputees.
The purpose of this study was to quantify the activation of
lower limb muscles during steady-state able-bodied walking
over walkways with differing degrees of slipperiness. Based on
previous work [11], we hypothesized that increasing slipperiness of the walkway would result in global increases in muscle
activity about the ankle, knee, and hip, likely indicating an overall stiffening of the lower limb joints. This hypothesis was tested
by recording EMG from lower limb muscles as subjects walked
across a nonslippery walkway and two walkways of different
slipperiness. Changes in muscle activity were quantified to estimate how joint mechanics are modified to enable walking on
slippery surfaces. We believe that our results have important implications for the future design of prosthetic legs that can adapt
to locomotion on different surfaces. A preliminary version of
this study has been reported [20].
II. METHODS
A. Walkway Surfaces
In previous slipping studies, lubricants were used to mimic
very slippery surfaces like ice [21]. A goal of this study was
to understand how people walk on surfaces that are moderately
slippery but, because they are so common, still pose a substantial
hazard. To achieve this goal, a novel walkway was created using
high-gloss, laminated flooring treated with furniture polish to
create a slippery surface that could easily be found in the home.
We characterized how people walk on three different 6-m
walkways with different levels of slipperiness (see Fig. 1). The
coefficient of friction (COF) of each walkway was determined
using an inclined sled test. The test identified the angle at which
the foot interface began to slide over the walkway surface, which

229

is directly related to the static COF. The following walkways
were used.
1) Nonslippery (NS): This was used as a baseline for comparison to the slippery walkways. Subjects walked across
polished laminate flooring wearing treaded socks, which
provided grip for a higher friction surface (COF > 0.4).
2) Moderately Slippery (MS): This was used to capture how
people walk on a surface that is less slippery than ice.
Subjects wore socks as they walked across the polished
laminate flooring (COF = 0.17 ± 0.01).
3) Very Slippery (VS): This walkway was used to capture
how subjects walk on a surface that is as slippery as ice.
As for other slipping studies [11], subjects wore plastic
booties over their bare feet and walked across a sheet of
plastic covered in mineral oil (COF = 0.08 ± 0.01).
B. Protocol
Eleven able-bodied subjects (four males, seven females; 28
± 4 years, 66 ± 16 kg, 172 ± 11 cm) gave written informed
consent to participate in this study, which was approved by
the Northwestern University Institutional Review Board. Each
subject wore a safety harness fastened to an overhead gantry
system to catch the subject in the event of a fall, though no falls
occurred in this study.
For each walkway, subjects were instructed to walk across
the entire 6 m at a self-selected comfortable pace. They did
this 20 times; each repetition is considered a trial. As would be
expected [11], subjects walked at different paces across each of
the test surfaces. Therefore, after completing these self-selected
pace trials, we collected a set of controlled-pace trials to separate
changes in walking strategy that resulted from a change in pace
from those due only to the change in surface type. In these
trials, subjects were instructed to walk at a pace of 75 steps/min,
assisted by a metronome. This pace was selected because it was
just below the lowest pace observed in a set of preliminary trials
assessing self-selected walking paces across all surfaces. Again,
20 trials were collected for each surface.
All subjects began on the NS walkway to capture baseline
gait patterns in NS conditions. The order in which subjects experienced the slippery walkways was randomized to account for
potential order effects associated with adaptation to the slippery
surfaces [11]. Finally, all subjects repeated the NS walkway at
the end of experiment to further control for learning during the
course of the experiment. For subsequent analysis and discussion, the first 20 trials recorded on the NS walkway will be
referred to as NS1 and the second 20 trials at the end of the
experiment will be referred to as NS2. Specifically, five subjects
completed the walkway trials in the order: NS1 → MS → VS
→ NS2. The remaining six subjects completed the trials in the
order: NS1 → VS → MS → NS2. The entire experiment took
about 1 h and rest breaks were taken after completion of each
walkway.
EMG signals were collected using bipolar surface electrodes
(model DE2.1; Delsys, Boston, MA, USA) from 11 muscles in
the right leg: medial gastrocnemius (MG), lateral gastrocnemius
(LG), soleus (SOL), tibialis anterior (TA), vastus medialis (VM),

230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
AVERAGE PACE, SPEED, AND STEP LENGTH (MEAN ± S.E.) N = 10
Walkway

NS1
NS2
MS
VS

Self-Selected Pace
(steps/min)

Control Trials: Pace
(steps/min)

Self-Selected Speed
(m/min)

Control Trials:
Speed (m/min)

Self-Selected Step
Length (m/step)

Control Trials: Step
Length (m/step)

110.6 ± 0.7
106.8 ± 0.7
105.3 ± 0.7
93.2 ± 0.7

77.8 ± 0.2
77.2 ± 0.2
77.4 ± 0.2
76.4 ± 0.2

69.8 ± 0.5
65.0 ± 0.5
59.3 ± 0.5
46.0 ± 0.5

42.9 ± 0.2
44.1 ± 0.2
41.5 ± 0.2
37.3 ± 0.2

0.63 ± 0.01
0.61 ± 0.01
0.56 ± 0.01
0.50 ± 0.01

0.55 ± 0.01
0.57 ± 0.01
0.54 ± 0.01
0.49 ± 0.01

vastus lateralis (VL), semitendinosus (ST), biceps femoris (BF),
adductor longus (AL), gluteus maximus (Gmax), and gluteus
medius (Gmed). These muscles represent both uniarticular and
biarticular muscles about the ankle, knee, and hip. Placement
of surface electrodes was guided using SENIAM standards and
verified by visualizing EMG activity generated during test contractions. The signals were amplified 10 000×, filtered between
20 and 450 Hz (Bagnoli 16, Delsys), and sampled at 1 kHz.
Kinematic data were collected using biaxial goniometers attached at the ankle, knee, and hip (Biometrics, Ltd.) and sampled at 500 Hz; kinematic data were only available for ten of the
11 subjects. Subjects were also outfitted with two custom-made
footswitches taped to the sole of their right foot at the heel and
the big toe. Footswitch data were sampled at 1 kHz and were
used to line up strides from individual gait trials. All signals were
acquired simultaneously using a custom 16-bit analog-to-digital
converter that allows for multirate sampling.

to visualize EMG and to quantify cocontractions, as described
below.
EMG amplitude was quantified by the RMS value over different windows throughout stance and swing phases. These included 0%–100% stance (overall stance), 0%–17% stance (initial contact), 17%–83% stance (mid-stance), 83%–100% stance
(pre-swing), 0%–100% swing (overall swing), 0%–50% swing
(early swing), and 50%–100% swing (late swing) [24]. Cocontraction between antagonistic muscle pairs was quantified
at each joint using a representative muscle when multiple muscles that performed the same action were recorded (i.e., MG was
chosen as the representative ankle plantarflexor). These included
MG and TA (ankle), VL and ST (knee), AL and Gmax (hip flexion/extension), and Gmed and Gmax (hip abduction/adduction).
For each pair, cocontraction was quantified by the cocontraction
index (CCI) as defined by Rudolph et al. [25]:
CCI =

C. Data Analysis
The first five trials from both the self-selected and speedcontrolled datasets were omitted from the analysis to account
for subjects becoming accustomed to the surface conditions and
to walking to the metronome. Each of the remaining 15 gait trials
was separated into individual strides. To avoid gait initiation and
termination effects, the first and last full strides were omitted
from the analysis [22], [23]. This resulted in approximately 30–
60 strides per subject for each walkway. The exact number of
strides depended on the walkway. For example, there tended to
be approximately 30 strides for the NS walkway, but closer to 60
strides for the VS walkway due to the shorter step length often
chosen for these more slippery conditions (see Table I). The
kinematic waveforms for all strides were visually confirmed for
consistency to ensure that no additional initiation or termination
strides were included. The remaining strides were divided into
stance phase and swing phase.
EMG signals were notch filtered at 60 Hz, full-wave rectified, and normalized in time to allow comparisons across walking speeds. This was accomplished using linear interpolation
to obtain 600 points uniformly spaced in time during stance
phase and 400 points uniformly spaced in time during swing
phase. These values were chosen based on the typical stride,
which is 60% stance and 40% swing [24]. To normalize EMG
magnitude, a moving average with a 0.5-s window was applied
to every stride for all walkways, including both self-selected
and controlled-speed strides. The maximum of every stride was
taken and the overall maximum value was used for normalization. A zero-lag 50 ms root-mean-square (RMS) filter was used

LowEMGi
∗ (Low EMGi + High EMGi )
HighEMGi

(1)

Low EMG refers to the activity of the less active muscle of the
pair, whereas High EMG refers to the activity of the more active
muscle. The CCI was computed at each time point within stance
phase and swing phase.
Video data were used to detect slipping, which only occurred
on the VS walkway. For the self-selected trials, slips were only
common within the first five trials that were already omitted
from the analysis. For the remaining 15 trials considered in
the analysis, slips were rare for steady-state strides during both
the self-selected and controlled-speed trials (i.e., on average 1–
2 slips occurred per subject over all subsequent trials). Strides
containing slips were omitted from the analysis. Video data were
also used to estimate walking speed, which were fully available
for ten of the 11 tested subjects (one subject had missing video
data for NS2).
D. Statistics
We hypothesized that all lower limb muscle activity would
increase as the walkway became more slippery. A linear mixedeffects model was used to test for significant differences in
EMG amplitude across walkways. The fixed factor of the model
was walkway (NS1, MS, VS, NS2), with subject treated as a
random factor. The hypothesis was tested in each of the stance
and swing phase windows described before. Results for the
window encompassing the entire stance or swing period are
presented, except when the results from the smaller windows
were substantially different. This same statistical model was
also used to assess significant differences in joint angles and the

WHITMORE et al.: GAIT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN WALKING ON DIFFERENT SLIPPERY WALKWAYS

CCI at every 5% of the stride, and average pace, speed, and step
length across all recorded strides. Post hoc comparisons were
done using Bonferroni corrections, testing for significance at a
5% level.
III. RESULTS
Significant differences in lower limb muscle activity and gait
characteristics were observed about the ankle, knee, and hip
when walking on slippery and NS walkways for both the selfselected and controlled-speed trials. We first present the results
for the self-selected trials in full, and then present the results for
the controlled-speed trials that differed from the self-selected
trials. There were minimal differences in kinematics between
the self-selected and controlled-speed trials, none of which affected the trends observed and presented, so the differences
in EMG are emphasized. Although many of the lower limb
muscles chosen for analysis are biarticular, for simplicity, we
describe each muscle according to the individual joint at which
its actions are the greatest, as defined by the SENIAM guidelines [26]. In addition, within the group of recorded muscles
existed sets of muscles that produced the same major action.
These included MG, LG, and SOL as ankle plantarflexors, VL
and VM as knee extensors, and ST and BF as knee flexors. The
resulting muscle activity in each set was highly similar (on average 90% of the post hoc testing was the same across muscles).
As such, a representative muscle from each set was chosen to
be presented.
A. Pace and Speed
Subjects gradually reduced their pace, speed, and step length
as the walkway became more slippery during the self-selected
trials, whereas a more consistent pace and speed were achieved
during the controlled-speed trials. There was a significant effect
of walkway for the self-selected pace (F3,1552 = 301.2; p <
0.001), speed (F3,1552 = 1052; p < 0.001), and step length
(F3,633= 217; p < 0.001), in which NS1 > MS > VS (p < 0.001
all comparisons; Table I). Self-selected pace, speed, and step
length were also reduced on NS2 when compared to NS1
(p < 0.001 all comparisons).
Although subjects closely matched the prescribed metronome
pace during the controlled-speed trials on all walkways, minor
yet statistically significant differences emerged between speeds
across walkways. On average, subjects walked at a slightly
higher pace than the 75 beats/min specified by the metronome
(see Table I, Column 2). There was a significant effect of walkway for pace (F3,1663 = 19.8; p < 0.001), with subjects adopting a significantly slower pace on VS compared to the other
walkways (p < 0.001 all comparisons). There was also a significant effect of walkway for speed (F3,1663 = 477; p < 0.001)
and step length (F3,628 = 68.4p < 0.001). Significant differences were observed between nearly all walkways for speed
and step length (p < 0.01 all comparisons), with the exception being the comparison between step length on NS1 and MS
(p = 0.34). Subjects adopted a significantly shorter step length
on VS compared to NS1 and NS2 (p < 0.01), which resulted in a
slower speed (p < 0.001). Finally, subjects adopted a larger step

231

length on NS2 compared to NS1 (p = 0.007), which resulted in
a significantly higher speed on NS2 (p < 0.001). Overall, the
range of speeds achieved during the controlled-speed trials was
reduced by over 70% when compared to the self-selected trials,
providing a dataset in which the effect of speed on changes in
EMG and kinematics was minimized.
B. Ankle
MG (an ankle plantarflexor) and TA (an ankle dorsiflexor)
showed reduced activity on the slippery walkways during the
period of stance in which they are typically active and opposing changes during swing. For a representative subject, there
were large differences in MG activity during midstance [see
Fig. 2(a) left-shaded area], in which activity was highest on
NS1 and lowest on VS. This was consistent across subjects
[see Fig. 2(c) left side], where a significant effect of walkway was present (F3,1737 = 269; p < 0.001). Post hoc testing revealed that muscle activity was gradually reduced as
the walkway became more slippery with NS1 > MS > VS
(p < 0.001 all comparisons). Activity was also reduced during the NS2 trials compared to NS1 (p < 0.001), but was still
larger than MS and VS (p < 0.001). During late swing, an opposite trend emerged when looking across subjects [see Fig. 2(c)
right side], but was weakly present, if at all, in the representative subject [see Fig. 2(a) right-shaded area]. There was a
significant effect of walkway (F3,1737 = 88.6; p < 0.001) with
post hoc testing revealing that muscle activity was gradually
increased as the walkway became more slippery, VS > MS
> NS1 and NS2 (p < 0.002 all comparisons). TA showed the
strongest activity during initial contact with the representative
subject showing highest activity on NS1 and lowest on VS [see
Fig. 2(b) left-shaded area]. This was consistent across subjects
with a significant effect of walkway [see Fig. 2(d) left side;
F3,1737 = 226; p < 0.001]. Post hoc testing revealed that muscle activity was gradually reduced on the slippery walkways
with NS1 > MS > VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons). Additionally, muscle activity was lower on NS2 compared to NS1
(p < 0.001). During preswing, differences were less consistent
across subjects, but a significant effect of walkway was found
[see Fig. 2(d) middle; F3,1737 = 77.1; p < 0.001]. Post hoc testing revealed muscle activity was highest on VS (p < 0.001 all
comparisons) and lowest on NS2 (p < 0.001 all comparisons),
yet only the latter appears obvious in the representative subject
[see Fig. 2(b) middle-shaded area]. Finally, during late swing
[see Fig. 2(b) and (d) right side], there was a significant effect of
walkway (F3,1737 = 107; p < 0.001) with muscle activity once
again gradually reduced as the walkway became more slippery,
NS1 > NS2 > MS > VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons).
A couple of key differences were observed between walkways
for the CCI at the ankle. At heel contact [0% stride, Fig. 3(a)],
there was a small increase in CCI on VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons). During the majority of midstance (10%–50% stride), CCI
was highest on NS1 when compared to NS2 and MS (p < 0.03
for shaded areas indicating significance), but only greater than
VS toward the end of midstance (40%–50% stride, p < 0.001
all comparisons). Finally, during late swing (80%–100% stride),

232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Influence of walkway surface on ankle EMG. Representative EMG for a single subject for (a) MG and (b) TA. Gray areas indicate windows of EMG
quantified using RMS with results shown for (c) MG during midstance and late swing (n = 11) and (d) TA during initial contact, preswing, and late swing (n =
11). Shading indicates p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

CCI was highest on VS when compared to all other walkways
(p < 0.001 all comparisons).
Gradual changes in the ankle angle occurred as the walkway
became more slippery, resulting in a reduced range of ankle angle during the stride. At heel contact [0%, Fig. 3(b)], ankle angle
was gradually reduced on the slippery walkways with NS1 and
NS2 > MS > VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons). Additionally,
when the ankle angle typically reaches maximum plantarflexion
during stance phase (5% stride), the degree of plantarflexion was
gradually reduced as the walkway became more slippery, NS1
and NS2 > MS > VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons). Thereafter,
as the ankle angle moves toward maximum dorsiflexion during stance, there was reduced dorsiflexion on the VS walkway
starting at 25% stride (p < 0.001 all comparisons) and reduced
dorsiflexion on MS compared to NS1 and NS2 starting at 35%
stride (p < 0.001). During the transition to swing phase (60%–
70% stride), when the ankle angle is once again biased toward
plantarflexion, there was a gradual decrease in plantarflexion
as the walkway became more slippery, NS1 and NS2 > MS >
VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons). Finally, swing phase also ends
with the ankle angle gradually reduced, NS1 and NS2 > MS >
VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons).
C. Knee
Fig. 3. Influence of walkway surface on ankle CCI and kinematics. (a) Average
degree of cocontraction for MG versus TA (n = 11) and (b) average ankle angle
(n = 10). Shading indicates p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

Knee muscle activity showed less consistent trends as the
walkway became more slippery than the ankle muscles. VL,
a knee extensor, showed only a few consistent changes across
subjects, where for a representative subject [see Fig. 4(a) leftshaded area], there appeared to be some interesting effects of the

WHITMORE et al.: GAIT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN WALKING ON DIFFERENT SLIPPERY WALKWAYS

233

Fig. 4. Influence of walkway surface on knee EMG. Representative EMG for a single subject for (a) VL and (b) ST. Gray areas indicate the windows of EMG
quantified using RMS with results shown for (c) VL for overall stance and late swing (n = 11) and (d) ST during initial contact, preswing, and late swing (n =
11). Shading indicates p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

walkway surface throughout stance, but these effects were not
present across subjects. For overall stance, there was a significant effect of walkway on the VL stance phase EMG [see
Fig. 4(c) left side; F3,1737 = 37.7; p < 0.001], with muscle activity lowest on NS2 (p < 0.001 all comparisons). During late
swing, a more consistent trend emerged across subjects, demonstrated by the representative subject [see Fig. 4(a) right-shaded
area], in which activity was highest on NS1 and lowest on VS.
During this period, there was a significant effect of walkway [see
Fig. 4(c) right side; F3,1737 = 20.9; p < 0.001] with post hoc testing revealing that muscle activity was gradually reduced as the
walkway became more slippery, NS1 > MS > VS (p < 0.004 all
comparisons). Muscle activity was also reduced on NS2 compared to NS1 (p < 0.001). ST, a knee flexor, showed strong
activity during initial contact [see Fig. 4(b) and (d), left side],
where there was a significant effect of walkway (F3,1737 = 122;
p < 0.001). Muscle activity gradually increased as the walkway
became more slippery, VS > MS > NS1 and NS2 (p < 0.01 all
comparisons), which can be clearly seen in the representative
subject EMG [see Fig. 4(b) left-shaded area]. Additionally, muscle activity was reduced on NS2 compared to NS1 (p < 0.001).
During preswing [see Fig. 4(d) middle], there was also a significant effect of walkway (F3,1737 = 72.3; p < 0.001). Activity
was highest on VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons), yet the effect
was small as shown by the representative subject [see Fig. 4(b)
middle-shaded area]. Finally, during late swing [see Fig. 4(b)
and (d) right side], there was a significant effect of walkway
(F3,1737 = 69.6; p < 0.001), yet no consistent trend emerged

between the walkways with activity lowest on VS and NS2
(p < 0.001 all comparisons).
CCI at the knee was increased on VS during portions of
stance phase, but reduced on the slippery walkways for late
swing phase. From 10% to 25% stride and 50% to 60% stride
[see Fig. 5(a)], there was an increase in CCI on VS (p < 0.001
all comparisons). During late swing phase (85%–90% stride),
there was a gradual decrease in CCI as the walkway became
more slippery with NS1 > MS > VS (p < 0.02 all comparisons),
and VS persisting to have the lowest CCI until the end of the
stride (p < 0.001 all comparisons).
Gradual changes in the knee angle occurred as the walkway
became more slippery that resulted in a smaller range in knee angle achieved throughout the stride. At heel contact [see Fig. 5(b),
0% stride], there was a gradual increase in knee flexion with VS
> MS > NS1 and NS2 (p < 0.03 all comparisons). Increased
knee flexion lasted on VS through most of stance phase until
50% stride (p < 0.001 all comparisons). There was also increased knee flexion on MS compared to NS2 throughout all of
stance (p < 0.01 all comparisons); though statistically significant, these differences were small. From the transition to swing
phase and throughout early swing (60%–75% stride), there was
a gradual decrease in knee flexion as the walkway became more
slippery with NS1 and NS2 > MS > VS (p < 0.003 all comparisons). Thereafter activity reversed, and the degree of knee
extension achieved was gradually reduced as the walkway became more slippery, NS1 and NS2 > MS > VS (p < 0.001 all
comparisons).

234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 5. Influence of walkway surface on knee CCI and kinematics. (a) Average
degree of cocontraction for VL versus ST (n = 11) and (b) average knee angle
(n = 10). Shading indicates p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

of freedom is difficult. Nevertheless, we observed a consistent
trend toward increased CCI on VS compared to all other walkways for 5%–10% stride between AL and Gmax [see Fig. 7(a),
p < 0.002] and for 10%–45% stride between Gmax and Gmed
[see Fig. 7(b), p < 0.001]. Swing phase in general showed minimal significant differences between walkways.
Distinct trends were observed for hip extension/flexion (sagittal plane motion) and hip abduction/adduction (frontal plane motion) on the slippery walkways, with constant changes throughout all of stance in the sagittal plane and more time varying behavior in the frontal plane. In the sagittal plane [see Fig. 7(c)],
hip flexion was greatest on VS starting at 20% stride lasting
throughout nearly the entire stride (p < 0.003 for shaded areas
indicating significance). Hip flexion was also lowest on NS2
for the entire stride (p < 0.003 all comparisons). In the frontal
plane [see Fig. 7(d)], the stride started with adduction highest on
VS (p < 0.001 all comparisons). Starting after 15% stride, the
degree of adduction was reduced on the slippery walkways such
that NS1 and NS2 > MS and VS until 50% stride (p < 0.03 all
comparisons). During the transition to swing phase, there was
once again enhanced adduction on VS that lasted through the
end of the stride (p < 0.001 all comparisons). Additionally, during swing phase, there was greatly reduced adduction on NS2
compared to all other walkways (p < 0.001 all comparisons).
E. Controlled-Speed Trials

D. Hip
The measured hip muscles showed variable changes in muscle activity, with some muscles showing increased or decreased
activity on the slippery walkways. AL, a hip adductor and flexor,
showed only a few consistent changes across subjects, but there
was still a significant effect of walkway [see Fig. 6(d) left side;
F3,1241 = 19.0; p < 0.001]. Post hoc comparisons revealed
that muscle activity was increased on MS and VS when compared to NS2 (p < 0.001), but only MS was greater than NS1
(p < 0.001). These effects were small and are not obvious in
the representative subject EMG [see Fig. 6(a) left-shaded area].
Overall swing (0%–100% swing) is also presented for AL [see
Fig. 6(d) right side] where there was a significant effect of walkway (F3,1241 = 19.3; p < 0.001). Here, post hoc testing revealed
that both MS and VS were greater than NS1 and NS2 (p < 0.001
all comparisons), but only an increase in MS is obvious in the
representative subject [see Fig. 6(a) right-shaded area]. Overall
stance and swing are also presented for Gmax, a hip adductor and
extensor [see Fig. 6(b) and (e)]. There was a significant effect
of walkway for overall stance (F3,1454 = 32.1; p < 0.001) and
for overall swing (F3,1454 = 26.1; p < 0.001). Muscle activity
was highest on NS1 compared to all other walkways (p < 0.005
all comparisons). Finally, Gmed, a hip abductor, showed a significant effect of walkway for midstance [see Fig. 6(c) and (f);
F3,1737 = 305; p < 0.001]. Activity was gradually increased
on the slippery walkways with VS > MS > NS1 and NS2
(p < 0.001 all comparisons). In addition, activity was reduced
on NS2 when compared to NS1 (p = 0.02).
The CCI at the hip was enhanced during initial contact on
the VS walkway. All three hip muscles assist in more than one
degree of freedom about the hip, so isolating CCI in one degree

Most comparisons between muscles were similar between
the self-selected and controlled-speed trials, including MG, TA,
ST, AL, and Gmed. On average, more than 75% of the post
hoc testing done for these muscles yielded similar conclusions
between the self-selected and controlled-speed conditions. An
example of the striking similarity between the self-selected and
controlled-speed trials can be seen for MG in Fig. 8(a) and
(d), compared to the self-selected trials shown in Fig. 2(a) and
(c). The post hoc testing for midstance was identical between
the two datasets, but during late swing, there was no longer an
increase in activity on MS relative to NS1 and NS2 (p > 0.05).
There were some notable differences between the EMG quantification for the self-selected and controlled-speed trials, specifically for VL and Gmax. Both muscles still showed a significant
main effect of walkway for the controlled-speed trials, but post
hoc comparisons differed. For the controlled-speed trials, VL
had gradually increasing muscle activity as the walkway became
more slippery [see Fig. 8(b) and (e)]. This was present during
overall stance, with VS > MS > NS1 and NS2 (p < 0.001 all
comparisons) and nearly present during late swing, with VS >
MS, NS1, and NS2 (p < 0.001 all comparisons), but MS only
greater than NS2 (p < 0.001). Muscle activity for Gmax also
presented differently in the controlled-speed trials, where activity was generally highest on VS [p < 0.02; Fig. 8(c) and (f)], as
compared to the self-selected trials in which activity was highest
on NS1 [see Fig. 6(e)].
IV. DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to quantify the changes in lower
limb muscle activity that occurred as people walked at steady
state on various slippery surfaces. We hypothesized that there

WHITMORE et al.: GAIT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN WALKING ON DIFFERENT SLIPPERY WALKWAYS

235

Fig. 6. Influence of walkway surface on hip EMG. Representative EMG for a single subject for (a) AL, (b) Gmax, and (c) Gmed. Gray areas indicate windows
of EMG quantified using RMS with results for (d) AL for overall stance and overall swing (n = 8), (e) Gmax for overall stance and overall swing (n = 9), and (f)
Gmed for midstance (n = 11). Shading indicates p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

Fig. 7. Influence of walkway surface on hip CCI and kinematics. (a) Average CCI for AL versus Gmax about hip flexion/extension (n = 8) and (b) average CCI
for Gmed versus Gmax about hip abduction/adduction (n = 9). (c) Average hip extension/flexion angle (n = 10) and (h) average hip abduction/adduction angle
(n = 10). Shaded areas indicate p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 8. EMG quantification of select muscles for the controlled-speed trials. Representative EMG for a single subject is shown for (a) MG, (b) VL, and (c) Gmax.
Gray areas indicate the windows of EMG quantified using RMS with results for (d) MG for midstance and late swing (n = 11), (e) VL for overall stance and late
swing (n = 11) and (f) Gmax for overall stance and overall swing (n = 9). Shading indicates p < 0.05. Error bars indicate S.E.

would be a global increase in muscle activity as the walkway
became more slippery, thereby contributing to increased limb
impedance and stability. The results of this study indicate that
walking on slippery surfaces requires more complex control than
originally hypothesized. Specifically, distinct changes occurred
at each joint, and the results for the ankle during stance phase
were in direct disagreement with the original hypothesis.
A. Proximal to Distal Control
The recorded ankle muscles had reduced activity on the slippery walkways during the period of stance in which they are
typically active. This reduction was accompanied by systematic changes in the ankle kinematics, and likely contributed to
decreased impedance of the joint. At heel contact, ankle dorsiflexor (TA) activity was reduced so that the foot landed in a more
plantarflexed position (i.e., with a smaller angle between the foot
and floor). Reducing the foot-floor angle has been commonly
cited as part of a proactive strategy used when anticipating stepping onto a slippery surface [5], [8], [9], [27]. Landing with a
flat foot increases the amount of surface area in contact with
the ground, which likely reduces the chances of slipping. In
addition, although gait kinetics were not collected, a reduced
foot-floor angle has been shown to contribute to a reduction
in shear forces, resulting in a lower operational COF, reducing
slip potential [5]. During midstance, there was a gradual decrease in ankle plantarflexor (MG) activity, likely contributing
to decreased ankle impedance as stance phase progressed. A reduction in ankle dorsiflexor activity was again observed during
late swing, in opposition to the increase in plantarflexor activity observed during the same period. This might suggest that
when preparing to make contact with the ground, subjects used
a strategy to control foot placement and thereafter switched to
an impedance strategy to allow the ankle to remain compliant
throughout stance phase. These trends were present in both the

self-selected and controlled-speed trials, indicating that a reduction in ankle muscle activity occurred on the slippery walkways
independent of the reduction in gait speed. This emphasizes the
importance of making these changes at the ankle to aid subjects
in walking without slipping on the slippery walkways.
Ankle muscle cocontraction has not been previously reported
continuously for the entire stride during steady-state walking.
A previous study did evaluate cocontraction about heel contact
from −20% to 20% stance, but provided only one discrete value
over this interval [7]. In agreement with the reduction in muscle
activity seen during midstance, there were trends of reduced
CCI on the slippery surfaces, further suggesting a decrease in
ankle impedance throughout stance. An increase in CCI was
observed from late swing to initial contact for the VS walkway.
Even though there was increased activity in MG, there was a
decrease in activity in TA, meaning that activity of the antagonistic muscle pair did not increase. This points to a potential
limitation when using the CCI to estimate the net activation of a
muscle since an increase in the CCI can occur even when there
is a decrease in the net muscle activity. Hence, although we have
included the CCI for comparison with previous studies [7], it is
important to recognize its limitations especially with respect to
understanding the net muscle activity about a joint and how this
activity contributes to impedance regulation.
The lack of ankle muscle cocontraction found in this study
suggests a key difference at the ankle for steady-state walking
compared to the anticipation of stepping on a single slippery
spot. By continuously adapting to the slippery walkways and
gaining experience with the low-friction surface, cocontraction
at the ankle became less necessary. Thus, activity about the ankle
was modulated differently for steady-state walking compared to
stepping onto a potentially slippery spot.
In general, the changes in muscle activity at the knee and
hip were in direct opposition to the changes in muscle activity

WHITMORE et al.: GAIT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN WALKING ON DIFFERENT SLIPPERY WALKWAYS

at the ankle, where a gradual increase in activity occurred as
the walkway became more slippery. This was true for the knee
flexor (ST), hip flexor and adductor (AL), and hip abductor
(Gmed). The increase in knee and hip muscle activity resulted
in increased knee flexion during stance phase and increased hip
flexion throughout nearly the entire stride, which likely lowered
the body’s center of mass (COM), improving stability. These
changes were anticipated based on previous work [5].
The range of hip abduction/adduction achieved during the
stride was significantly less on the slippery walkways compared
to the NS walkway. A smaller range of hip frontal plane motion would be consistent with increased hip impedance. Three
phases of activity in the hip frontal plane occur during stance
phase on a NS surface [28]; an initial concentric contraction of
the adductors, followed by a burst of activity in the abductors to
control further adduction, and, finally, a concentric contraction
from the abductors to return to a neutral position. For each of
these phases, we observed an increase in muscle activity on the
slippery walkways, for both the self-selected and controlledspeed trials. Initially, an increase in adductor activity resulted in
a greater degree of adduction. During midstance, an increase in
abductor activity resulted in a decrease in the degree of adduction. Finally, stance phase ended with increased adduction due to
enhanced adductor activity, ultimately positioning the hip back
into the neutral position for that walkway by the end of swing
phase. Enhanced muscle activity at precise times likely provided
increased control over frontal plane hip motion on the slippery
walkways, which would greatly increase trunk stabilization.
An interesting trend was observed in select knee and hip
muscles in which there appeared to be a broadening of muscle
activity on the slippery walkways. This has been previously
observed in other studies that utilized a walkway similar to the
very slippery walkway [11], [29]. Martino et al. commented
that the widening of muscle activity might be how the nervous
system “copes” with the unstable conditions. Interestingly, the
opposite trend appears for the ankle muscles in which the EMG
patterns are less wide on the slippery walkways. To confirm
these trends are significant across all subjects, an additional
analysis needs to be completed.
Unlike the ankle, the results for some knee and hip muscles showed large differences between the self-selected and
controlled-speed trials that may have obscured interesting
trends. When gait speed was controlled, there was a gradual
increase in VL activity as the walkway became more slippery
and increased Gmax activity on the VS walkway. Heightened
VL activity in conjunction with the already heightened ST activity could indicate a potential increase in cocontraction about
the knee on the slippery walkways. Heightened knee muscle cocontraction has been previously observed during initial contact
when subjects anticipated stepping onto a single slippery spot
[7]. Increased cocontraction would likely stiffen the knee joint
[12], which would contribute to stabilization of the proximal leg
and trunk. Similarly, additional hip muscle activity recruited for
the VS walkway could indicate further stabilization of the trunk
for the most extreme slippery conditions. For the controlledspeed trials, it appears that a gradient of muscle activity was
present across the lower limb; muscle activity was gradually

237

reduced in distal musculature, activity was gradually enhanced
as the musculature became more proximal, and, finally, the most
proximal muscles showed a consistent increase in activity for
the VS walkway alone. This gradation of activity was less apparent for the self-selected trials, suggesting a reorganization of
muscle activity as subjects walked at faster, more natural speeds.
B. Implication of Findings
We found that ankle muscle activity was reduced on the slippery walkways for both the self-selected and controlled-speed
trials, highlighting the importance of the ankle in aiding subjects
to walk without slipping on slippery surfaces. The decrease in
activity suggests a decrease in joint impedance. Further work
is needed to determine if these changes in joint impedance inferred from EMG are significant, as well as how they influence
the mechanical coupling between joints. Both findings could
be useful for the control of prosthetic limbs, as more advanced
prosthetic limbs are being developed that are capable of multijoint impedance control [13]. Additionally, a concern of many
commercially available prosthetic legs is they often have a stiff
ankle-foot complex. Our results suggest this design could be
dangerous when used on a slippery surface. In contrast, designs
that modulate impedance to be in accordance with the surface
conditions could greatly improve subject safety and locomotor
independence.
The role of the knee and hip in ambulation on slippery surfaces
is less clear due to the differences between the self-selected and
controlled-speed trials. Upon controlling for gait speed, knee
muscle activity increased in both muscles of the antagonistic
muscle pair on the slippery walkways. This could suggest an
increase in cocontraction at the knee, resulting in an increase
in joint impedance. This might further necessitate the use of
a prosthetic limb capable of multijoint impedance control to
improve lower limb amputee locomotion on slippery surfaces.
Whether a change in knee impedance is occurring needs to be
confirmed with future work. It also remains unclear whether
this change would be appropriate under natural circumstances
(i.e., when subjects walk at their own prescribed pace in real-life
situations). In addition, when speed was controlled, there was
an increase in activity across all hip muscles, but only on the
VS walkway. This could indicate a need to recruit additional
proximal muscle activity for extremely slippery conditions, but
additional recruitment is less necessary for moderately slippery
conditions.
The changes in muscle activity across the lower limb
have additional implications beyond potential changes in joint
impedance. Independent of gait speed, enhanced muscle activity at the knee and hip resulted in increased knee and hip
flexion, and stabilization of the hip in the frontal plane. Although COM was not directly quantified, it can be inferred that
the body’s COM was lowered through increased knee and hip
flexion. A previous study observed that subjects kept their COM
centered over the supporting limb through lateral stabilization
of the pelvis when walking on a VS walkway [11]. Although we
did not quantify lateral COM displacements, the range of hip
abduction/adduction achieved on both slippery walkways was
significantly smaller than that on the NS walkway, suggesting a

238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

lateral stabilization of the hip, and, thus, enhanced control over
the body’s COM. It has been previously shown that precise coordination of the lower limb muscle activity reduces COM motion
on a slippery surface [30]. While we cannot directly comment
on this based on the data acquired in the current study, it is
possible that reduction in COM movement is a key component
in the strategy used to reduce slip potential.
To walk without slipping on the slippery walkways, the knee
and hip could be increasing stabilization of the trunk by lowering and stabilizing the body’s COM. In contrast, the ankle is
concerned with keeping a wide area of the foot in contact with
the ground, through a reduction in ankle muscle activity that
begins before contact with the ground and continues throughout
stance phase. The ankle has also been shown to respond passively during the recovery response to an unexpected slip [6],
so this reduction in activity might also be the ankle preparing
to respond appropriately in the event that a slip occurs. A reduction in cocontraction has been linked to decreased reaction
times [12], which would be beneficial in the event of a slip.
Additionally, a reduction in ankle plantarflexor muscle activity
could be beneficial when considering the storage and release of
elastic energy in plantarflexor tendons. A reduction in muscle
activity likely results in less shortening of the muscle, and, subsequently, less stretching of the tendon. With less stretching, it is
likely the tendons are storing less energy for release during the
push-off phase of stance. The plantarflexor muscles and tendons
typically act like a catapult during normal locomotion [31], but
this catapult effect might be less desirable during ambulation on
slippery surfaces and thus it is reduced.
C. Study Limitations
There were some limitations with the experimental protocol,
which could influence the presented results. First, footswitches
were used to separate the gait trials into individual strides and
then into stance and swing phase. The presence of footswitches
under the right heel and toe may have affected subjects’ ambulation on the walkways, specifically during heel contact and
toe off, important phases for slippery gait analysis. Since these
footswitches were placed at the beginning of the experiment
and worn in the same position for all walkways, their affect on
subject ambulation is likely the same across walkways. Thus,
any impact on gait dynamics would be the same and would have
no impact on the results presented here.
Another limitation is only a small sample of ankle, knee,
and hip muscles were recorded over a limited range of walking
speeds. Although we describe changes in muscle activity to be
indicative of global changes at the ankle, knee, and hip, these
changes have only been confirmed for the recorded muscles and
do not necessarily extrapolate to other muscles. For instance, no
intrinsic foot muscles were recorded and it has been shown that
their biomechanical contribution to locomotion may be separable from extrinsic foot muscles, such as those recorded in this
study [32]. Their contribution to locomotion on slippery surfaces cannot be inferred from the present data, but might be an
interesting avenue to pursue in future work.
We also did not record COM or kinetics, which could contribute to the strategy used to reduce slip potential. Changes in

COM and kinetics were observed in a previous study utilizing
a VS walking [11]. Although their results are consistent with
the inferences made here, being able to directly report these
measures would give more weight to these assertions.
Additionally, we observed some degree of adaptation to the
slippery walkways, which may have impacted the presented
results. Muscles at the ankle, knee, and hip, showed reduced
activity when walking on NS2 compared to NS1. In general,
this did not impact the observed trends between the NS and
slippery walkways. The decrease in muscle activity on NS2
suggests that gait on the NS walkway was altered by walking
on the slippery walkways. Prior experience with a low-friction
surface has been shown to alter subsequent gait dynamics [8],
so this was an anticipated outcome. In the current experiment,
two different slippery walkways were used, meaning that subjects could adapt to one slippery walkway before exposure to
the second slippery walkway. Prior exposure to a slippery surface could have affected gait dynamics on the next slippery
surface. We did not control for the order in which subjects experienced the walkways (i.e., some subjects experienced MS
before VS and vice versa) in the statistical analysis, but the
presented results were consistent for all subjects regardless of
the order in which they completed the walkways. With such a
small sample size within each order (five completed MS first
and six completed VS first), additional experiments would need
to be conducted to flesh out whether prior exposure to one
slippery walkway significantly impacts gait on another slippery
walkway. Locomotor adaptation is a complex area of research
and to properly understand its effect in the context of slippery
surfaces, additional experimentation and careful control studies
need to be completed, a potentially interesting area for future
work.
V. CONCLUSION
To successfully walk without slipping on a slippery surface
requires distinct modulation of muscle activity at the ankle,
knee, and hip. There was a gradual reduction in ankle muscle
activity as the walkway became more slippery that was independent of walking speed. A reduction in ankle muscle activity
likely contributes to decreased joint impedance, which would
ensure a greater surface area of the foot was in contact with
the ground. There were patterns of increasing muscle activity
at the knee and hip on the slippery walkways, which resulted
in increased knee and hip flexion and stabilization of the hip in
the frontal plane. At matched walking speeds, additional muscle
activity was recruited at the knee and hip, potentially contributing to increased cocontraction at these joints. This could mean
that increased impedance of these joints might also play a role
when ambulating on slippery surfaces. For ambulation over any
slippery surface, distinct changes at the ankle, knee, and hip
are essential to minimize slipping on these surfaces. A potential change in ankle impedance could indicate that designing a
lower limb prosthesis with an ankle joint that behaves similarly
to those of able-bodied people under these conditions may reduce the likelihood of a lower limb amputee experiencing a slip
over a range of slippery surfaces.

WHITMORE et al.: GAIT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN WALKING ON DIFFERENT SLIPPERY WALKWAYS

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Barrow at the Center for
Bionic Medicine for helping to revise and edit this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Luukinen et al., “Fracture risk associated with a fall according to type
of fall among the elderly,” Osteoporos Int., vol. 11, pp. 631–634, 2000.
[2] W. C. Miller et al., “The prevalence and risk factors of falling and fear
of falling among lower extremity amputees,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.,
vol. 82, pp. 1031–1037, 2001.
[3] J. Kulkarni et al., “Falls in patients with lower limb amputations: Prevalence and contributing factors,” Physiotherapy, vol. 82, pp. 130–136, 1996.
[4] M. W. Legro and G. Reiber, “Issues of importance reported by persons with lower limb amputations and prostheses,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.,
vol. 36, pp. 155–163, 1999.
[5] R. Cham and M. S. Redfern, “Changes in gait when anticipating slippery
floors,” Gait Posture, vol. 15, pp. 159–171, 2002.
[6] R. Cham and M. S. Redfern, “Lower extremity corrective reactions to slip
events,” J. Biomech., vol. 34, pp. 1439–1445, 2001.
[7] A. J. Chambers and R. Cham, “Slip-related muscle activation patterns in
the stance leg during walking,” Gait Posture, vol. 25, pp. 565–572, 2007.
[8] T. L. Heiden et al., “Adaptations to normal human gait on potentially
slippery surfaces: The effects of awareness and prior slip experience,”
Gait Posture, vol. 24, pp. 237–246, 2006.
[9] D. S. Marigold and A. E. Patla, “Strategies for dynamic stability during
locomotion on a slippery surface: Effects of prior experience and knowledge,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 88, pp. 339–353, 2002.
[10] M. S. Redfern et al., “Biomechanics of slips,” Ergonomics, vol. 44,
pp. 1138–1166, 2001.
[11] G. Cappellini et al., “Motor patterns during walking on a slippery walkway,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 103, pp. 746–760, 2010.
[12] J. Finley et al., “Contributions of feed-forward and feedback strategies
at the human ankle during control of unstable loads,” Exp. Brain. Res.,
vol. 217, pp. 53–66, 2012.
[13] F. Sup et al., “Design and control of a powered transfemoral prosthesis,”
Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 27, pp. 263–273, 2008.
[14] E. Perreault et al., “Considering limb impedance in the design and control
of prosthetic devices,” in Neuro-Robotics, vol. 2, P. Artemiadis. Dordrech,
The Netherlands: Springer, 2014, pp. 59–83.
[15] S. Pfeifer et al., “Model-based estimation of knee stiffness,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2604–2612, Sep. 2012.
[16] Y. J. Tsai and S. I. Lin, “Older adults adopted more cautious gait patterns
when walking in socks than barefoot,” Gait Posture., vol. 37, pp. 88–92,
2013.

239

[17] T. Asaka et al., “Gait control in young adults trained on a low friction
floor,” J. Phys. Ther. Sci., vol. 16, pp. 151–158, 2004.
[18] P. F. Tang and M. H. Woollacott, “Inefficient postural responses to unexpected slips during walking in older adults,” J. Gerontol., A Biol. Sci.
Med. Sci., vol. 53A, pp. M471–M480, 1998.
[19] T. R. Dillingham et al., “Limb amputation and limb deficiency: Epidemiology and recent trends in the united states,” South. Med. J., vol. 95,
pp. 875–883, 2002.
[20] M. W. Whitmore et al., “Lower-limb muscle activity when walking on
different slippery surfaces,” in Proc. IEEE/EMBS Conf. 7th Int. Neural
Eng., 2015, pp. 783–786.
[21] K. L. Troy and M. D. Grabiner, “Recovery responses to surrogate slipping tasks differ from responses to actual slips,” Gait Posture, vol. 24,
pp. 441–447, 2006.
[22] C. A. Miller and M. C. Verstraete, “A mechanical energy analysis of gait
initiation,” Gait Posture, vol. 9, pp. 158–166, 1999.
[23] S. Hirokawa, “Normal gait characteristics under temporal and distance
constraints,” J. Biomed. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 449–456, 1989.
[24] T. R. Olson and Pawlina, Wojciech, A.D.A.M. Student Atlas of Anatomy,
2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[25] K. S. Rudolph et al., “Dynamic stability in the anterior cruciate ligament
deficient knee,” Knee Surg., Sports Traumatol., Arthrosc., vol. 9, pp. 62–
71, 2001.
[26] H. Hermens et al., European Recommendations for Surface Electromyography. Enschede, NL, USA: Roessingh Research and Development,
1999.
[27] A. J. Chambers and R. Cham, “Kinematics of the foot during slips,”
Occupational Ergonomics, vol. 3, pp. 225–234, 2003.
[28] C. D. MacKinnon and D. A. Winter, “Control of whole body balance in the
frontal plane during human walking,” J. Biomech., vol. 26, pp. 633–644,
1993.
[29] G. Martino et al., “Neuromuscular adjustments of gait associated with
unstable conditions,” J. Neurophysiol., 2015.
[30] G. Cappellini et al., “Migration of motor pool activity in the spinal cord
reflects body mechanics in human locomotion,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 104,
pp. 3064–3073, 2010.
[31] M. Ishikawa et al., “Muscle-tendon interaction and elastic energy usage
in human walking,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 99, pp. 603–608, 2005.
[32] K. Zelik et al., “Coordination of intrinsic and extrinsic foot muscles
during walking,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 115, pp. 691–701, 2015.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

