148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

A Novel Lead Design for Modulation and Sensing
of Deep Brain Structures
Allison T. Connolly, Rio J. Vetter, Jamille F. Hetke, Benjamin A. Teplitzky, Daryl R. Kipke, David S. Pellinen,
David J. Anderson, Kenneth B. Baker, Jerrold L. Vitek, and Matthew D. Johnson∗

Abstract—Goal: Develop and characterize the functionality of
a novel thin-film probe technology with a higher density of electrode contacts than are currently available with commercial deep
brain stimulation (DBS) lead technology. Such technology has potential to enhance the spatial precision of DBS and enable a more
robust approach to sensing local field potential activity in the context of adaptive DBS strategies. Methods: Thin-film planar arrays
were microfabricated and then assembled on a cylindrical carrier to achieve a lead with 3-D conformation. Using an integrated
and removable stylet, the arrays were chronically implanted in
the subthalamic nucleus and globus pallidus in two parkinsonian
nonhuman primates. Results: This study provides the first in vivo
data from chronically implanted DBS arrays for translational nonhuman primate studies. Stimulation through the arrays induced a
decrease in parkinsonian rigidity, and directing current around the
lead showed an orientation dependence for eliciting motor capsule
side effects. The array recordings also showed that oscillatory activity in the basal ganglia is heterogeneous at a smaller scale than
detected by the current DBS lead technology. Conclusion: These 3D DBS arrays provide an enabling tool for future studies that seek
to monitor and modulate deep brain activity through chronically
implanted leads. Significance: DBS lead technology with a higher
density of electrode contacts has potential to enable sculpting DBS
current flow and sensing biomarkers of disease and therapy.
Index Terms—Current steering, deep brain stimulation (DBS),
implantable biomedical electrodes, neural engineering.

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE the early 1970s, the design of deep brain stimulation
(DBS) lead implants for human use has largely followed the
pioneering work of Hosobuchi et al. [1]. This design consisted
of a linear stack of cylindrical electrodes that provided several
options for tuning stimulation along the long axis of the thalamic
ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus for treating chronic
pain. The current state-of-the-art DBS lead similarly consists
of a linear stack of four or more cylindrical electrode contacts,

S

Manuscript received February 18, 2015; revised September 27, 2015; accepted October 14, 2015. Date of publication October 14, 2015; date of current
version December 17, 2015. This work was supported by grants from the NIH
(R44-NS060269 and R01-NS081118) and from the Michael J Fox Foundation.
The work of A. T. Connolly was supported by the NSF under GRFP (0006595)
and NSF-IGERT Systems Neuroengineering program (DGE-1069104). Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
A. T. Connolly and B. A. Teplitky are with the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Minnesota.
R. J. Vetter, J. F. Hetke, D. R. Kipke, D. S. Pellinen, and D. J. Anderson are
with NeuroNexus.
K. B. Baker and J. L. Vitek are with the Department of Neurology, University
of Minnesota.
∗ M. D. Johnson is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: john5101@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2492921

each with diameter, height, and axial pitch dimensions greater
than or equal to 1 mm. While this lead design has proven useful
and effective for treating a range of medication-refractory brain
disorders [2], [3], it is particularly sensitive to surgical targeting
errors that are tangential to the lead’s primary axis. Indeed,
numerous studies have noted that targeting errors of only 1–
2 mm can result in unwanted side effects that mask the intended
therapy [4]–[8].
This clinical outcome sensitivity to surgical targeting error
stems in part because nearly the same DBS lead design is used
regardless of the targeted nucleus or fiber pathway. For example, in most cases, the stack of cylindrical electrodes provides
adequate flexibility for stimulating in the relatively large VPM
nucleus of thalamus in cases of slight surgical misplacement;
however, targeting smaller and more oblong nuclei like the subthalamic nucleus (STN) [5] or pedunculopontine nucleus [6]
through relatively large cylindrical electrodes is likely to modulate a range of neuronal pathways around the DBS lead, many of
which are thought to evoke unintended side-effects when stimulated [9], [10]. These examples motivate a clinical need for new
DBS lead designs that enable directing electrical current around
[5] and along the lead [11] as well as closer to the spatial scale
of the local cytoarchitecture.
Segmentation of the stacked cylindrical electrodes into a 3-D
array of electrodes along and around a DBS lead may facilitate more spatially targeted stimulation and recording from deep
brain structures. Computational modeling studies have indicated
that subdividing each cylindrical electrode’s circumference into
four rectangular electrodes [16] or four ellipsoidal electrodes
[4], [5], [12] can improve the lead’s capacity to steer, shift, and
sculpt regions of stimulated tissue within the brain. Such refinement in the spatial activation volumes has potential to “rescue”
therapy from a DBS lead implant in which side effects emerge
at lower stimulation amplitudes than are necessary for delivering optimal therapy [4]. Such advances may also be particularly
important for the success of adaptive closed-loop DBS therapies [13]–[15]. Reducing the electrode size and populating more
electrodes around the DBS lead has potential to enable recording local field potential (LFP) oscillatory activity at finer spatial
resolution than what is currently available with the relatively
large cylindrical electrodes [16]. Such an approach may limit
the degree of shunting of the underlying oscillatory sink and
source heterogeneity within the targeted brain region [17], [18].
Previously, two DBS array designs, with electrodes around
and along the DBS lead, have been tested in acute insertion
experiments in humans prior to implantation of a commercial
DBS lead with the standard design containing a stack of four

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CONNOLLY et al.: NOVEL LEAD DESIGN FOR MODULATION AND SENSING OF DEEP BRAIN STRUCTURES

149

TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN A STANDARD DBS LEAD AND AN RDBSA LEAD
CUSTOMIZED FOR TARGETING THE STN AND THE GP

Contact Height (μm)
Contact Width (μm)
Contact Surface Area (μm2 )
Axial Pitch (μm)
Radial Pitch
Lead Diameter
1-kHz Impedance (kΩ,
M±SD): macroelectrodes
microelectrodes

Scaled-down
Clinical Lead

STN rDBSA

GP rDBSA

500
N/A
982 000
1000
N/A
625
4.55 ± 2.02 N/A

360
360
98 537
572
90°, 471 μm
600
364 ± 220
956 ± 571

470
370
149 361
750
90°, 471 μm
600
443 ± 255
1480 ± 478

II. DBS ARRAY AND PACKAGING
A. Thin-film Electrode Array Design

Fig. 1. rDBSA dimensions. Comparison of scaled-down versions of the
(a) human DBS lead and rDBSA leads with electrode configurations for the
(b) STN and (c) GP. (d) Images of the GP version of the rDBSA fully assembled
(top) and of the planar thin-film electrode array before wrapping around the
carrier tube (bottom). Scale bar: 1 mm.

cylindrical electrodes. One lead design had four segmented
contacts around the lead perimeter [8], whereas the other design had three segmented contacts [7]. Both studies provided
proof-of-concept feasibility data that radially directed stimulation is superior to radially uniform stimulation in terms of reduction in power consumption and augmentation of the therapeutic
window, which describes the quantitative difference between
strength-duration curves for generating therapy and evoking side
effects.
Here, we present the first chronic in vivo testing results of
a high-density DBS array (rDBSA) lead, consisting of eight
rows of four ellipsoidal electrode contacts arranged around the
circumference of 600-μm-diameter DBS lead. A similar array
design was reported previously from our group in 2011 for acute
testing in nonhuman primates [5]. This study provides the first
chronic data with this array as well as the packaging and implantation approach to render this lead design applicable for chronic
use. Additionally, we show that high-density DBS arrays enable
1) more precise spatial stimulation around the circumference of
the lead and 2) provide finer spatially resolution of LFP recordings in the vicinity of the implanted DBS leads than can be
achieved with annular clinical electrodes.

The rDBSA design contained eight rows by four columns
of ellipsoidal macroelectrode contacts and a single column of
eight microelectrode contacts for a total of 40 contacts (see
Fig. 1). The dimensions and spacing of the macroelectrodes
were tailored to fit the STN or both segments of the globus
pallidus (GP) of the rhesus macaque (see Table I). The rDBSA
targeting the STN had smaller contacts and an axial span of
4.9 mm, whereas the rDBSA targeting the GP had larger contacts
and spanned 5.6 mm. In comparison, a version of the clinical
DBS lead, scaled down to the size of the primate brain, has
four cylindrical contacts and spans 3.5 mm as used in previous
studies [19], [20] (NuMed, Hopkinton, NY, USA). In addition
to the macroelectrodes, the rDBSA contained one column of
eight microelectrodes with circular contacts of 50 μm diameter,
interspersed between rows of macroelectrodes. Both GP and
STN designs had an integrated thin-film cable to carry signals
to the proximal region of the implant package. Array design
specifications were imported into NeuroNexus’ custom layout
algorithm to generate the required layers for the final design.
The algorithm provided a method to equalize the resistance of
all traces, an important characteristic for thin-film stimulation
leads. Conventional integrated circuit layout software was then
used to configure the designs onto a wafer frame from which
photolithographic masks were made.
B. Microfabrication Process and Array Packaging
The arrays were fabricated using conventional microfabrication processes [21], [22] with five photolithographic mask
steps. The arrays were comprised of platinum traces sandwiched
between dielectric layers of silicon carbide and/or polyimide.
Contact vias were opened through the top dielectrics and either
platinum or iridium electrode sites were deposited and patterned.
The planar 2-D arrays were singulated, removed from the wafer,
and then wrapped around a carrier tube to create a 3-D cylindrical shape and a structure suitable for implantation with a stylet.
Only the array portion of the thin-film device was adhered to the
carrier probed with epoxy, allowing the insulated traces to be
less susceptible to fracture during lead implantation. A stainless
steel stylet was inserted through the carrier tube until reaching

150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

an epoxy-filled portion of the tube at a level slightly above the
electrode array sites. The carrier tube was constructed with a
rounded tip, consistent with commercial DBS leads, and consistent with a shape that would blunt dissect tissue during the
implantation process. In addition, a FlexPCB cable was bonded
to the thin-film trace pad at the proximal end of the probe. This
cable provided a means to interface with either a ZIF and/or
omnetics connector.
III. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A. Preclinical Animal Studies
Functional rDBSAs were chronically implanted in two adult
rhesus monkeys (macaca mulatta, subject P, ♀, 19 y.o., 9.6 kg;
subject G, ♀, 17 y.o., 9.0 kg). All procedures were performed
in compliance with the United States Public Health Service
policy on the humane care and use of laboratory animals and
were approved by the University of Minnesota’s Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. Under isoflurane anesthesia,
each monkey was surgically implanted with a titanium headpost
and two cephalic chambers that were oriented in sagittal (STN)
and coronal (GP) orientations in the same hemisphere [20]. The
STN and GP were identified using preoperative magnetic resonance imaging at 7 T (T2-weighted and susceptibility-weighted
imaging). Following a 1–2 week recovery period, each animal
received a computerized tomography scan to plan the DBS array implantation using Monkey Cicerone [23]. In a separate
procedure, each monkey was rendered moderately to severely
parkinsonian with systemic injections of the dopaminergic neurotoxin, MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine)
to quantify the therapeutic efficacy of the rDBSAs.
B. DBS Implant Procedure
Microelectrodes (250 μm diameter, 0.8–1.2 MΩ, FHC, Bowdoin, ME, USA) were advanced through each chamber to verify
coordinates for the STN and GP. Firing rates and patterns of
single neurons were used to localize the borders of these nuclei,
and sensorimotor territories within these nuclei were identified
as those containing neurons whose firing rate was modulated
by passive joint articulations [19] or in some cases, volitional
movement. The locations of the recording tracks relative to the
corticospinal tract of the internal capsule were determined using
microstimulation (10–150 μA, 300 Hz, 0.5 s) to evoke movements about the face, upper extremity, and lower extremity.
Based on the mapping results, a DBS implant trajectory was
selected such that multiple rows of rDBSA electrodes would
span the sensorimotor region of each target. For both monkeys,
the GP target was mapped and implanted before mapping and
implanting the STN target.
Prior to rDBSA implantation, a snap ring with a tongue (custom machined from Ultem) was inserted into a groove in the
inner wall of each cranial chamber. Next, a stainless steel stiffening stylet was inserted into the lumen of the rDBSA and both
were then guided into the brain using the same microdrive used
for the initial mapping experiments. Once at the target, the lead
was secured to the tongue of the snap ring with cyanoacrylate.

Fig. 2. rDBSA implant procedure. (a) Cephalic recording chambers were
surgically attached to the skull and (b) the target area of the brain was mapped
with microelectrode recordings. (c) rDBSA was implanted with the microdrive.
(d) flexPCB cable was folded over the chamber and (e) secured within the slit
adapter and cable guard. (f) Omnetics connectors were secured in a dry chamber
with setscrews and silicone and allowed access to the electrical connection for
each rDBSA.

The stiffening stylet was then retracted and the microdrive assembly was removed from the chamber. A slit adapter was custom machined from a PEEK rod to fit onto the top of each cranial
chamber to allow for the flexPCB cable of the rDBSA to exit
the chamber,, while also allowing for closure of the chamber
with its original chamber cap (see Fig. 2). A 3-D printed cable
guard was attached to the slit adapter with screws to protect the
flexPCB cable as it exited the chamber. A dry chamber with
space to accommodate the proximal connectors of two rDBSAs
was secured to the headcap. The exposed portion of the flexPCB
within and outside each cranial chamber was coated with silastic to form a waterproof barrier. Additionally, the portion of the
silastic-coated flexPCB outside the chambers was coated with a
thin layer of dental acrylic to form another protective coating.
C. Electrochemical Impedance Measurements
After implantation, the 1-kHz impedance of each electrode
site was monitored using a NiPOD (NeuroNexus, multiplexed
measurement of 40 electrodes) or an impedance conditioning
module (FHC, manual measurement). In addition, impedance
spectroscopy was measured over 0.1 Hz to 25 kHz using an

CONNOLLY et al.: NOVEL LEAD DESIGN FOR MODULATION AND SENSING OF DEEP BRAIN STRUCTURES

151

Fig. 3. In vivo impedance measurements. (a) Averaged 1-kHz impedances of an STN rDBSA implant in monkey P (mean ±SE). Stimulation was delivered on
day 34 (red diamond) and impedance spectroscopy on days 27 and 72 (gray diamonds). (b) Impedance spectroscopy Nyquist plots measured after implant before
stimulation (left column) and on the final day of the study after stimulation (right column). Macroelectrode contacts are labeled 1–16 and 25–40 (green) in diagram,
and the microelectrode contacts are labeled 17–24 (blue in diagram). Impedance values measured at low frequencies (1 Hz) are in the top right region of each plot,
and impedance values measured at high frequencies (25 kHz) are in the bottom left. Impedances from only viable contacts are shown.

AutoLab potentiostat (Metrohm, The Netherlands) to characterize the resistive and capacitive changes in the electrode–tissue
interface over time [24]–[26]. All impedances were measured
in a two-electrode configuration with the titanium headpost,
attached with bone screws, serving as the counter electrode.
D. DBS Protocols
To investigate the capacity for the rDBSA implants to deliver
sufficient charge to provide a therapeutic effect, biphasic chargebalanced pulse trains were delivered through four electrodes in
one row (100-μs cathode-leading pulse width, 130 Hz, referenced to headpost). The parkinsonian severity was measured
using a modified Unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale (mUPDRS). Muscle rigidity scores were assessed through passive manipulation of upper and lower extremity joints (i.e., wrist, elbow,
shoulder, ankle, knee, hip) on a scale of 0–3 (0: no rigidity, 3: severe rigidity) by two investigators who were blinded to the stimulation settings, including whether the stimulation was on or off.
Additionally, the capacity of the rDBSA to direct current
around the lead was evaluated by delivering pulse trains individually through each of the 32 macroelectrodes (biphasic chargebalanced 100-μs cathode-leading pulse width, 130 Hz). DBS
amplitudes activating the corticospinal tract of internal capsule
were assessed using the motion capture of reflective markers
placed on finger digits, wrist, elbow, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle,
and foot digits (T-series system, Vicon, Centennial, CO, USA).
Evoked responses were repeated over several trials to establish
consistency of threshold amplitudes.
E. Unit-Spike and LFP Recordings
Immediately following implantation and periodically thereafter, wideband recordings digitized at 22 kHz were collected

from the eight microelectrodes (in reference to the titanium
headpost). Resting-state LFP recordings were also acquired with
a low-pass filter cut off at 781 Hz and 1.5625 kHz sampling rate
in reference to the titanium headpost. LFP recordings were rereferenced in bipolar montages by subtracting recordings from
neighboring electrode contacts around each rDBSA row, yielding 32 bipolar LFPs. LFP recordings were collected in awake,
resting-state conditions without DBS and during DBS at both
subtherapeutic and therapeutic settings. Stimulus artifacts were
removed from each recording using a template subtraction algorithm [19].
F. Histological Methods
The orientation of the rDBSA was determined by the orientation of the probe and flexible cable within the cephalic recording chamber. To confirm this orientation, direct current lesions
were delivered through select electrodes 1 h prior to euthanization. Each monkey was deeply anesthetized, given an overdose
of pentobarbital (100 mg/kg), and transcardially perfused with
a phosphate buffered saline solution (PBS) followed by 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. Brains were blocked in the
coronal plane, postfixed in 4% PFA, and cryoprotected in 15%
sucrose solution for 1–3 days. Coronal sections, 50 μm thick,
were taken using a freezing microtome in the coronal plane.
The rDBSA implants were left in the brain during sectioning
so the exact orientation could be visualized. Nissl staining was
performed on both brains to verify the location and orientation
of the rDBSA implants within the target nuclei.
IV. RESULTS
The functionality and performance of the DBS arrays were
assessed through a combination of 1) in vivo impedance

152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

measurements, 2) postimplant unit-spike recordings, 3) parkinsonian limb rigidity ratings during DBS, 4) upper and lower
extremity limb movements, while applying stimulation through
electrodes around the rDBSA lead, and 5) resting-state LFP
recordings across the array before and during DBS.
A. In Vivo Impedance Measurements
Preimplant 1-kHz site impedances for macroelectrode and
microelectrode contacts were on the order of 350–450 kΩ and 1–
1.5 MΩ, respectively. Impedance spectroscopy was performed
periodically to probe changes in the electrode–tissue interface
over time. Contacts deemed viable for duration of the experiments (i.e., consistent 1-kHz impedance below 2 MΩ) were
included in this analysis. For subject P, 23 contacts on the GPlead and 30 contacts on the STN-lead were viable, while subject
G had 30 viable contacts on the GP-lead and 32 viable contacts
on the STN-lead. During the initial postimplantation period,
impedance spectra on a Nyquist plot shifted to the right, indicating a change in the resistive component of the complex
impedance. For subject P, 1-kHz impedances were measured
every few days after the initial implant to track the development of the encapsulation layer around the lead [see Fig. 3(a)].
Over the first two weeks, the impedances increased slightly
and plateaued. Site impedances also decreased after DBS [see
Fig. 3(b)], similar to findings from previous studies [27], [28].
B. Verification of Implantation Targeting
While coregistration of preoperative MR imaging with postoperative CT imaging has been the gold standard for estimating
the location and orientation of implanted electrodes relative to a
targeted nucleus within the human brain, the rDBSAs provided
an additional means to verify targeting of the lead implant in the
form of unit-spike recordings along the microelectrode column
(see Fig. 4). Single-unit spike activity was observed on a subset
of the microelectrode channels at the time of implant in subject
P (STN and GP leads) and subject G (only STN lead). In the
case of subject P, the firing rate and pattern of the units was used
to confirm the targeting of each lead within the sensorimotor GP
or STN as assessed through passive joint manipulation. In all
cases, no discriminable spike activity was observed one week
after implantation.

Fig. 4. Postimplant unit-spike recordings. (a) Location of rDBSAs within the
GPe/GPi (left) and STN (middle) in subject P, as well as the STN (right) in
subject G. No discriminable spike activity was detected on the GPe/GPi rDBSA
in subject G. (b) rDBSA microelectrode recordings from the GP (top) and STN
(bottom) on the day after implant. D: dorsal, M: medial, and A: anterior.

C. Stimulation Capabilities of the rDBSA
Stimulating through a single row of electrodes in each array, DBS (130 Hz, total amplitude above 400 μA) was able to
reduce parkinsonian rigidity in both subjects (see Fig. 5). Four
individual current sources were used to deliver equal amounts of
charge through four contacts in a single row. In both subjects P
and G, low-frequency (30 Hz) stimulation did not reduce rigidity regardless of the stimulation amplitude tested. Similarly, low
stimulation amplitudes (total 50 μA in subject P and 200 μA in
subject G) did not reduce rigidity regardless of frequency tested.
Only the combination of high amplitude and high frequency reduced rigidity in both subjects when delivered to either the STN
or the GP. Notably, the therapeutic effect on rigidity was less in

subject P than subject G. Involuntary motor contractions were
elicited at lower current amplitudes in subject P than subject
G, which limited the magnitude of delivered current for the
purposes of therapy.
rDBSAs implanted in the STN were also able to generate
directional stimulation such that the amplitudes of evoked involuntary muscle contractions were larger when stimulation was
delivered through electrode contacts facing internal capsule (lateral) than for electrodes facing the medial direction (see Fig. 6).
The rDBSA position and orientation within the STN were confirmed with histology in both monkeys [see Fig. 6(a)]. Lower
amplitudes were needed to evoke limb movements in subject P

CONNOLLY et al.: NOVEL LEAD DESIGN FOR MODULATION AND SENSING OF DEEP BRAIN STRUCTURES

153

Fig. 5. Therapeutic effects of DBS using four electrodes in a single row.
Contralateral rigidity mUPDRS subscores off (MPTP) and on stimulation at
subtherapeutic frequencies (30 Hz), subtherapeutic amplitudes (50–200 μA),
and at therapeutic levels (130 Hz, >200 μA) summed over all joints. Error
bars display standard deviation over multiple assessments. Asterisks indicate
significant differences with p < 0.05 according to the Wilcoxon rank sum test.

(150–450 μA) than in subject G (300–600 μA), which corresponded to a more lateral implant trajectory in subject P compared with subject G [see Fig. 6(b)]. Additionally, the largest
movements were evoked with stimulation through rows 3–6 in
subject P, while deeper rows 1–4 evoked larger movements in
subject G. These rows in subject G correspond to the rows on the
probe that were located within or near the STN. Deeper contacts
in subject P (rows 1–3) were located in the substantia nigra and
shallower contacts in subject G (rows 5–8) were located in the
zona incerta and thalamus and farther away from the internal
capsule. Lastly, the contact and direction that evoked the largest
amplitude movement differed across limbs [see Fig. 6(c)]. Stimulation through contacts in subject P, row 6 evoked the largest
arm movements in the lateral direction, whereas stimulation in
the dorsal direction evoked the largest leg movements. Similarly, dorsal stimulation through row 2 evoked the largest leg
movements in subject G, whereas dorsal, not lateral stimulation
evoked the largest arm movements in subject G [see Fig 6(d)].
D. LFP Recordings During DBS
Bipolar LFPs were sensed from both STN and GP leads during DBS in the MPTP state. Due to crosstalk in the recording system, LFPs were sensed from the nonstimulated rDBSA during
stimulation (i.e., GP LFPs sensed during STN DBS). As shown
in Fig. 7, LFPs were recorded in both GPe and GPi during the
onset of STN DBS at subtherapeutic amplitude, subtherapeutic frequency, and therapeutic settings. The order of stimulation
settings was varied to account for long latency washout effects,
and the recordings were repeated over four days. Spectrograms
were calculated with a 2 s wide, 200-m·s step moving window.
Before stimulation was turned on, there was prominent activity
in the 10–20 Hz (beta) band, and the spectral power was variable across rows on the same rDBSA [see Fig. 7(a) and (b)].
Subtherapeutic amplitude stimulation did not change the power
in the beta band, subtherapeutic frequency stimulation partially

Fig. 6. Directional stimulation. (a) Coronal histological slices (cresyl violet)
of Subjects P and G at a level where the rDBSA passed through the STN adjacent to the internal capsule (IC). (b) Color map of the maximum amplitude
of displacement (disp) of the knee and hip joints in Subjects P and G, respectively, evoked by individual stimulation through each of the 32 macroelectrodes.
Hashed boxes show nonusable contact sites (c) Examples of directional stimulation through row 6 of the STN implant in Subject P near the border with IC.
Cross section of row 6 of the rDBSA shows electrodes facing dorsal (D), lateral
(L), ventral (V), and medial (M) in the context of histology. Stimulation was
delivered at 130 Hz at increasing amplitudes of 150 μA (cyan), 300 μA (green),
and 450 μA (magenta). (d) As in (c), examples of directional stimulation through
row 2 of the STN implant in Subject G.

154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 7. LFP changes induced by DBS in subject G. (a) Example spectrograms recorded from one column of bipolar LFPs recorded from the GP rDBSA
during stimulation through the STN rDBSA. DBS was turned on at time 0. The cartoon on the left shows the columns used for recording in the GP (green filled
circles) referenced between columns (brackets). DBS was delivered at high frequency/low amplitude (left column), low frequency/high amplitude (middle column),
and high frequency/high amplitude (right column). (b) Example power spectral densities off (blue) and on high frequency/high amplitude (red) stimulation recorded
from one pair of contacts in the GP (right) and STN (left). The blue shaded area spans the beta band (10–20 Hz) and the green shaded area spans the gamma band
(70–80 Hz). (c) Colors show the amplitude of beta/gamma power recorded in the GP with STN stimulation on relative to off stimulation. (d) Colors show the
amplitude of beta/gamma power recorded in the STN with GP stimulation on relative to off stimulation. All values were averaged over four recording sessions.
Magenta outlines show bipolar contacts displayed in part (b). Hashed boxes show unviable contacts.

reduced the power in the beta band, and therapeutic settings
nearly eliminated the power in the beta band.
To quantify this effect, the beta power was normalized by
the power in the 70–80-Hz (gamma) band. This normalization
was used to account for any broadband increase in power during stimulation as a result of any remaining stimulation artifact.
The beta/gamma ratio was compared in the on-stimulation and
off-stimulation cases. LFPs in the GP showed a reduction in
beta/gamma ratio when stimulation was delivered to the STN
[see Fig 7(c)]. This reduction was largest at high stimulation
amplitudes (4 × 150 μA across a row of macroelectrodes in
the STN) (low frequency: min 0.37, max 0.95, high frequency:
min 0.37, max 0.99) and for bipolar LFPs recorded between

the medial and dorsal columns. Low-amplitude high-frequency
stimulation showed a smaller reduction (min 0.50, max 0.90).
Stimulation delivered to the GP did not consistently reduce
beta/gamma power recorded in the STN [see Fig. 7(d)]. Lowamplitude high-frequency GP stimulation caused a very small
decrease in beta/gamma power in the STN (min 0.77, max 1.10).
High amplitude GP stimulation caused a relative increase in the
beta/gamma ratio in the STN (low frequency: min 0.97, max
1.35, high frequency: min 0.96, max 1.14). This effect was not
likely associated with an increase in gamma power on stimulation compared to off stimulation, because the relative beta
power on compared to off stimulation had the same trends as the
beta/gamma power (data not shown). The high-density electrode

CONNOLLY et al.: NOVEL LEAD DESIGN FOR MODULATION AND SENSING OF DEEP BRAIN STRUCTURES

sites on the rDBSA also revealed heterogeneity in the restingstate LFPs around and along the lead’s axis. This oscillatory
activity was differentially modulated by DBS. For example, the
medial-dorsal bipolar montage exhibited the strongest suppression of beta oscillations in GP during STN-DBS. This level of
spatial resolution could not be sensed with clinical DBS leads,
which are not segmented around the circumference of the lead
and have fewer and larger electrode contacts along the axis of
the lead.
V. DISCUSSION
This study provides electrochemical, electrophysiological,
and behavioral analysis from four implanted DBS arrays in two
nonhuman primates, showing enhancements in the spatial direction of stimulation and in the spatial precision of LFP recordings
along and around the implanted carrier probe in comparison with
the state-of-the-art clinical technology.
A. Importance of Spatial Targeting in DBS Therapy
Expanding the design space for DBS leads is of strong clinical
importance for future DBS therapies given the known relationship between surgical targeting precision of DBS lead implants
and successful delivery of DBS therapy [29], [30]. In the STN,
for instance, surgical targeting errors in the ventral, lateral, and
anterior directions can lead to stimulus-induced tonic muscle
contractions stemming from activation of the corticospinal tract
of internal capsule. The likelihood of these side effects is readily apparent when considering that the STN is nestled along the
lateral extent of internal capsule and has a relative volume (nonhuman primates: 2 × 4 × 6 mm [31], human: 3 × 5 × 12 mm
[32]) that is on the same order of magnitude as the contact
spacing along the DBS lead. In addition to tonic muscle contractions, DBS about the STN region can evoke paresthesia,
contralateral conjugate eye deviation, apraxia of eyelid opening, weight gain, and limbic side effects [33]. The sensorimotor
GP is an alternative target for treating Parkinson’s disease and
dystonia with DBS. The GP is a larger structure than the STN,
approximately 10–15 mm medial to lateral in the human [32],
but it is also bordered by the internal capsule and placement of
a lead too medial or posterior within the structure will cause
tonic muscle contractions [29], [34]. Similarly, DBS lead placement in the ventral intermediate (Vim) nucleus of the thalamus
for treatment of tremor is also sensitive to location because of
the elongated morphology of the nucleus [29] and interdigitation with other thalamic nuclei. Misplacement of the DBS lead
in this brain region can result in stimulus-induced paresthesia,
tonic muscle contractions [35], as well as deficits in speech and
swallowing [36].
The rDBSA as reported here has a geometric advantage over
the current clinical leads, providing improved spatial targeting
of DBS. The rDBSA manufacturing process enabled tailoring
the electrode height and array spacing to interface with the nucleus of interest at a higher spatial resolution than has been
currently available. For example, the rDBSA designed for the
STN had five rows of four electrodes each (effectively 20 macroelectrodes) in the same space occupied by four cylindrical elec-

155

trodes on a scaled-down version of the human DBS lead. For
the rDBSA designed for the GP, electrodes were spread out to
span both internal and external segments of GP with 32 macroelectrodes as compared with four cylindrical electrodes on the
scaled-down version of the human DBS lead.
The arrangement of segmented electrodes around the lead
circumference enabled directing stimulation in three dimensions, as identified by the generation of spatially heterogeneous
stimulus-evoked muscle contractions (see Fig 6), a finding that
has clinical importance in reducing the emergence of DBS side
effects through more advanced current steering approaches [7].
Further, more stimulation contacts within the target brain region will allow for variation in the location of the stimulating
electrode over time [37], which may contribute, for example,
to long-term reduction of motor signs through network desynchronization stimulation patterns that leverage multiple contacts
[38]. The number and arrangement of electrodes on the DBS arrays was chosen to provide a balance between flexibility of
stimulation direction and limits on the applied charge density
necessary to drive therapeutic effects on parkinsonian motor
signs and the packaging requirements that go along with higher
density neural probe implants. It is important to note that the
DBS arrays reported here did not have the spatial resolution to
make inferences on the optimal spatial scale of electrode sizes
and configurations for current steering or LFP recordings. DBS
arrays with even higher site density [39] and computational
models of high-density DBS arrays [12] may be able to better probe this question. However, the DBS array dimensions in
this study did show improved functional resolution over current
DBS lead designs.
B. Circumferential Segmentation of DBS Lead Electrodes
DBS leads with segmented electrode contacts around the lead
circumference have been hypothesized to improve targeting of
stimulation within the brain [5], [7], [8], [37]. In a computational modeling study of STN neural activation, Buhlmann et al.
showed comparable neuronal activation between a Medtronic
3389 DBS lead and a circumferentially segmented version of
that same lead [37]. To create the segmented lead, each cylindrical contact was split into four rectangular electrodes for a total
of 16 contacts that enabled current steering around the lead. In
practice, the geometry of these electrodes could be problematic
due to higher current densities at the corners of the contacts during stimulation. Toader et al. utilized computational modeling
to assess a DBS-array with 64 disc contacts (16 rows of four
contacts), each with 0.5 mm diameter and 0.25 mm spacing.
This design was also able to direct current around the lead and
alter the shape of a theoretical volume of activated tissue [40].
This computational study was followed by acute implantation
of a prior version of the rDBSA reported here [5].
The results of this study showed that the rDBSA was able to
deliver directionally selective stimulation to the internal capsule
by activating individual contacts around a single row as well as
across the entire electrode array (see Fig. 6). By thoroughly surveying the effects of stimulation at each viable contact, we were
able to show topographical differences in the electrode locations
with the lowest threshold for inducing muscle contractions about

156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

the upper and lower extremities, which may reflect differences
in the orientation of corticospinal tract fibers within internal capsule related to each extremity. The heterogeneity of thresholds
in adjacent contacts for both animals, and especially for monkey
P, likely stem from the known variability in motor thresholds
[41], [42] and potentially some fabrication variability within the
DBS array. In both cases, however, stimulation directed toward
internal capsule resulted in the lowest threshold for muscle activation. If a patient were implanted with a similar electrode
array, a similar procedure could be used to identify the contacts
and directions evoking the largest movements. Then the current steering techniques could be employed to direct therapeutic
stimulation away from these movement-inducing directions and
toward directions that maximally reduce symptoms. These results suggest that the DBS arrays may have potential usefulness
in improving or rescuing therapy for patients with low-threshold
stimulation-induced side effects, consistent with prior subjectspecific computational modeling results in motor thalamus [4]
and brainstem [6].
In clinical studies, a different circumferentially segmented
DBS electrode array was acutely implanted in the STN or Vim
thalamus of 13 human patients [7]. These investigational leads
contained two cylindrical contacts on the dorsal portion and
two rows of three lead-conforming square contacts on the distal portion of the lead (Aleva Neurotherapeutics SA, Lausanne,
Switzerland). DBS through the square contacts was deemed to
be superior to the cylindrical contact because less voltage was
required to achieve a therapeutic effect, and there was a larger
therapeutic window between improvement in parkinsonian motor signs and stimulus-evoked side effects. Along with previous
modeling studies, this study by Pollo et al. showed that DBS
leads with electrodes segmented around the lead circumference
can be superior to current DBS lead technology with cylindrical
electrodes. The results presented herein build on these studies
as well as our previous rDBSA experiments now demonstrating
the capacity for arrays to circumferentially direct current using
a chronic implant despite an encapsulated tissue response.
C. Implications for Adaptive DBS Therapies
The accumulation of improvements in the DBS technology
is driving toward implementation of adaptive DBS that can meter stimulation and provide a more consistent level of therapy
for each individual patient. Several studies have shown how
relatively simple implementations of on-demand or threshold
based control algorithms can improve parkinsonian motor signs
in acute settings. For example, an algorithm that used the amplitude of beta power to turn STN DBS on and off showed slight
benefits over continuous, therapeutic DBS in a cohort of patients
[13]. Improved sensing and stimulation electrode geometries are
likely to enhance the isolation of salient biomarkers and provide
improved spatial selectivity for stimulation. Examination of intraoperative STN LFPs has shown a depth dependence in the
amplitude of beta power, with the largest signal being detected
in the dorsal or central part of the STN [43]–[46]. As shown
in Fig. 7, sensing through the rDBSA revealed heterogeneity
of LFPs around the circumference of the lead in STN and GP,
which may not be sensed with larger cylindrical contacts.

Detection of salient biomarkers of disease pathophysiology
and stimulation therapies is of high clinical interest. LFPs are
considered fairly robust in chronically implanted devices [47],
while still providing useful data regarding the underlying neuronal activity of the sampled population. In the context of brain
nuclei and subnuclei, it is important to consider the spatial scale
of LFPs, as highlighted in this study. LFPs related to pathophysiology and mechanisms of DBS, will likely be more informative
at a smaller spatial scale than what is currently offered by the
relatively large cylindrical electrodes on commercial DBS leads
[48]. It is possible that the optimal size and spacing are below
the spatial resolution of the rDBSA, and future studies would
be important to further investigate this possibility.
VI. CONCLUSION
DBS leads with segmented electrodes around and along the
lead shank have potential to further the study of mechanisms of
DBS therapy by 1) enhancing the targeting of stimulation, and
2) recording LFPs at a finer spatial scale. Here, we provide the
first in vivo evidence from chronically implanted DBS arrays
in primates supporting these concepts. Such DBS technology
is poised to create a much richer space from which to develop
closed-loop stimulation protocols.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank R. Shoemaker, C. Rackham,
J. Jeon, F. Agnesi, Y. Xiao, D. Zhang, and L. Zitella for their
technical assistance. They would also like to thank S. Cogan
(University of Texas at Dallas) and EIC Biomedical for electrochemical testing services.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Hosobuchi et al., “Chronic thalamic stimulation for the control of facial
anesthesia dolorosa,” Arch. Neurol., vol. 29, pp. 158–161, Sep. 1973.
[2] T. Wichmann and M. R. Delong, “Deep brain stimulation for neurologic
and neuropsychiatric disorders,” Neuron, vol. 52, pp. 197–204, Oct. 5,
2006.
[3] J. S. Perlmutter and J. W. Mink, “Deep brain stimulation,” Annu. Rev.
Neurosci., vol. 29, pp. 229–257, 2006.
[4] M. Keane et al., “Improved spatial targeting with directionally segmented
deep brain stimulation leads for treating essential tremor,” J. Neural. Eng.,
vol. 9, art. no. 046005 (10 pages), Aug. 2012.
[5] H. C. Martens et al., “Spatial steering of deep brain stimulation volumes
using a novel lead design,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, pp. 558–566,
Mar. 2011.
[6] L. M. Zitella et al., “Computational modeling of pedunculopontine nucleus deep brain stimulation,” J. Neural. Eng., vol. 10, art. no. 045005 (12
pages), Aug. 2013.
[7] C. Pollo et al., “Directional deep brain stimulation: An intraoperative
double-blind pilot study,” Brain, vol. 137, pp. 2015–2026, Jul. 2014.
[8] M. F. Contarino et al., “Directional steering: A novel approach to deep
brain stimulation,” Neurology, vol. 83, pp. 1163–1169, Sep. 23, 2014.
[9] A. M. Frankemolle et al., “Reversing cognitive-motor impairments in
Parkinson’s disease patients using a computational modelling approach
to deep brain stimulation programming,” Brain, vol. 133, pp. 746–761,
Mar. 2010.
[10] E. Moro et al., “Unilateral pedunculopontine stimulation improves falls
in Parkinson’s disease,” Brain, vol. 133, pp. 215–224, Jan. 2010.
[11] A. Chaturvedi et al., “Current steering to activate targeted neural pathways
during deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic region,” Brain Stimul.,
vol. 5, pp. 369–377, Jul. 2012.

CONNOLLY et al.: NOVEL LEAD DESIGN FOR MODULATION AND SENSING OF DEEP BRAIN STRUCTURES

[12] B. A. Teplitzky et al., “Sculpting neural activation using deep brain stimulation leads with radially segmented contacts,” in Proc. IEEE/EMBS 6th
Int. Conf. Neural Eng., 2013, pp. 170–173.
[13] S. Little et al., “Adaptive deep brain stimulation in advanced Parkinson
disease,” Ann. Neurol., vol. 74, pp. 449–457, Sep. 2013.
[14] A. Priori et al., “Adaptive deep brain stimulation (aDBS) controlled
by local field potential oscillations,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 245, pp. 77–86,
Jul. 2013.
[15] B. Rosin et al., “Closed-loop deep brain stimulation is superior in ameliorating parkinsonism,” Neuron, vol. 72, pp. 370–384, Oct. 20, 2011.
[16] L. J. Bour et al., “Directional recording of subthalamic spectral power
densities in Parkinson’s disease and the effect of steering deep brain stimulation,” Brain Stimul., vol. 8, pp. 730–741, Jul./Aug. 2015.
[17] G. Buzsaki, C. A. Anastassiou, and C. Koch, “The origin of extracellular
fields and currents—EEG, ECoG, LFP and spikes,” Nature Rev. Neurosci.,
vol. 13, pp. 407–420, 2012.
[18] M. Stead et al., “Microseizures and the spatiotemporal scales of human
partial epilepsy,” Brain, vol. 133, pp. 2789–2797, Sep. 2010.
[19] F. Agnesi et al., “Deep brain stimulation imposes complex informational
lesions,” PLoS One, vol. 8, art. no. e74462 (11 pages), 2013.
[20] M. D. Johnson et al., “Neural targets for relieving parkinsonian rigidity
and bradykinesia with pallidal deep brain stimulation,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 108, pp. 567–577, Jul. 2012.
[21] P. J. Rousche et al., “Flexible polyimide-based intracortical electrode
arrays with bioactive capability,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48,
no. 3, pp. 361–371, Mar. 2001.
[22] J. S. Ordonez et al., “Improved polyimide thin-film electrodes for neural
implants,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2012, vol. 2012,
pp. 5134–5137.
[23] S. Miocinovic et al., “Cicerone: Stereotactic neurophysiological recording and deep brain stimulation electrode placement software system,” in
Operative Neuromodulation. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2007, pp.
561–567.
[24] M. D. Johnson, K. J. Otto, and D. R. Kipke, “Repeated voltage biasing
improves unit recordings by reducing resistive tissue impedances,” IEEE
Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 160–165, Jun. 2005.
[25] K. J. Otto, M. D. Johnson, and D. R. Kipke, “Voltage pulses change
neural interface properties and improve unit recordings with chronically
implanted microelectrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 2,
pp. 333–340, Feb. 2006.
[26] J. C. Williams et al., “Complex impedance spectroscopy for monitoring
tissue responses to inserted neural implants,” J. Neural. Eng., vol. 4, pp.
410–423, Dec. 2007.
[27] S. Hemm et al., “Evolution of brain impedance in dystonic patients
treated by GPI electrical stimulation,” Neuromodulation, vol. 7, pp. 67–75,
Apr. 2004.
[28] S. F. Lempka et al., “In vivo impedance spectroscopy of deep brain stimulation electrodes,” J. Neural. Eng., vol. 6, art. no. 046001 (11 pages), Aug
2009.
[29] E. B. Montgomery, Jr., Deep Brain Stimulation Programming: Principles
and Practice. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2010.
[30] J. Volkmann et al., “Basic algorithms for the programming of deep
brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease,” Mov. Disord., vol. 21 Suppl 14,
pp. S284–S289, Jun. 2006.

157

[31] A. Nambu et al., “Dual somatotopical representations in the primate subthalamic nucleus: Evidence for ordered but reversed body-map transformations from the primary motor cortex and the supplementary motor area,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 16, pp. 2671–2683, Apr. 15, 1996.
[32] J. Yelnik, “Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia,” Mov. Disord.,
vol. 17 Suppl 3, pp. S15–S21, 2002.
[33] P. Krack et al., “Surgery of the motor thalamus: Problems with the present
nomenclatures,” Mov. Disord., vol. 17 Suppl 3, pp. S2–S8, 2002.
[34] M. S. Okun et al., “Mood changes with deep brain stimulation of STN
and GPi: Results of a pilot study,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psych., vol. 74,
pp. 1584–1586, Nov. 2003.
[35] A. M. Lozano, “Vim thalamic stimulation for tremor,” Arch. Med. Res.,
vol. 31, pp. 266–269, May/Jun. 2000.
[36] R. Pahwa et al., “Long-term evaluation of deep brain stimulation of the
thalamus,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 104, pp. 506–512, Apr. 2006.
[37] J. Buhlmann et al., “Modeling of a segmented electrode for desynchronizing deep brain stimulation,” Front. Neuroeng., vol. 4, art. no. 15 (8
pages), 2011.
[38] P. A. Tass et al., “Coordinated reset has sustained after-effects in parkinsonian monkeys,” Ann. Neurol., vol. 72, pp. 816–820, 2012.
[39] A. Willsie and A. Dorval, “Fabrication and initial testing of the muDBS:
A novel deep brain stimulation electrode with thousands of individually
controllable contacts,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 17, p. 9961, Jun. 2015.
[40] E. Toader et al., “Steering deep brain stimulation fields using a high
resolution electrode array,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
2010, vol. 2010, pp. 2061–2064.
[41] C. R. Butson et al., “Patient-specific analysis of the volume of tissue
activated during deep brain stimulation,” NeuroImage, vol. 34, pp. 661–
670, Jan. 15, 2007.
[42] P. Ashby et al., “Neurophysiological effects of stimulation through
electrodes in the human subthalamic nucleus,” Brain, vol. 122 (Pt 10),
pp. 1919–1931, Oct. 1999.
[43] C. C. Chen et al., “Intra-operative recordings of local field potentials
can help localize the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease surgery,”
Exp. Neurol., vol. 198, pp. 214–221, Mar. 2006.
[44] M. Weinberger et al., “Beta oscillatory activity in the subthalamic nucleus and its relation to dopaminergic response in Parkinson’s disease,”
J. Neurophysiol., vol. 96, pp. 3248–3256, Dec. 2006.
[45] C. de Solages et al., “Maximal subthalamic beta hypersynchrony of the
local field potential in Parkinson’s disease is located in the central region
of the nucleus,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psych., vol. 82, pp. 1387–1389,
Dec. 2011.
[46] A. A. Kuhn et al., “The relationship between local field potential and
neuronal discharge in the subthalamic nucleus of patients with Parkinson’s
disease,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 194, pp. 212–220, Jul. 2005.
[47] D. Wang et al., “Long-term decoding stability of local field potentials
from silicon arrays in primate motor cortex during a 2D center out task,”
J. Neural Eng., vol. 11, art. no. 036009 (16 pages), Jun. 2014.
[48] L. J. Bour et al., “Directional recording of subthalamic spectral power
densities in Parkinson’s disease and the effect of steering deep brain stimulation,” Brain Stimulation, vol. 8, pp.730–741, 2015.
Authors’, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

