IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

679

Steerable Catheters in Cardiology: Classifying
Steerability and Assessing Future Challenges
Awaz Ali∗ , Dick H. Plettenburg, Member, IEEE, and Paul Breedveld

Abstract—Objective: This review aims to provide a structured
classification of the underlying steering mechanisms in steerable
catheters and to assess their future challenges. Methods: Existing,
patented, and experimental designs of steerable catheters are classified with respect to their steerability. Subsequently, the classification is used as a tool for defining future requirements and challenges
for steerable cardiac catheters. Results: The results of the classification provide two categories of steering at a fundamental level:
1) Force generation in the tip and 2) force transmission to the tip.
The former group consists of force generating steering mechanisms
as a result of 1) electric, 2) thermal, and 3) magnetic actuation. The
latter group comprises force transmitting steering mechanisms
as the result of 4) hydraulic chamber actuation or 5) mechanic
cable actuation. Each category can be further subdivided into
multiple subcategories. Future requirements and challenges are
found for steering and positioning capabilities, cardiac applications
and safety, and miniaturization potential. Conclusion: A structured
classification is presented which identifies the different steering
mechanisms in steerable catheters. The classification proves to be
a useful tool in determining future requirements and challenges,
being invaluable for future application-driven design. Significance:
Using the applied classification as a tool for future design will not
only provide insight into previously applied steering technology, it
will identify new and unexplored options too. Additionally, insight
into the requirements and challenges for catheter steering toward
and inside the heart, will allow more dedicated systems, allowing
intervention- and patient-specific instrument manipulation.
Index Terms—Actuation, classification, interventional cardiology, minimally invasive surgery, steerable catheter.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATHETERS are among the most versatile and essential
instruments used in cardiology. Where in the past they
were designed as flexible tubes, meant for monitoring or drug
delivery, today catheters have evolved into more dedicated instruments with additional tip functionality. As such, a large
variety of commercially available catheters exist, being adopted
in a number of different treatments including coronary stenting, repair of congenital heart defects, heart valve repair or
replacement, and ablation of atrial fibrillation (AF) or ventricular tachycardia [1]–[4]. However, precise positioning of the

C

Manuscript received October 26, 2015; revised December 24, 2015; accepted
January 22, 2016. Date of publication February 4, 2016; date of current version
March 17, 2016. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. Ali is with the Department of BioMechanical Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering, Delft University of Technology,
Delft 2628, The Netherlands (e-mail: a.ali@tudelft.nl).
D. H. Plettenburg and P. Breedveld are with the Department of BioMechanical
Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering, Delft
University of Technology.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2016.2525785

catheter tip inside the heart remains one of the main challenges
in interventional cardiology and electrophysiology as a result
of the heart’s continuous motion due to respiration and heartbeat. Additionally, tortuous vessels, complex three dimensional
shapes in the heart, and the lack of vessel wall support in the
heart further limit the ability for accurate steering.
In an effort to combat these complications in catheter-based
therapies, both manually and robotically steerable systems have
emerged in the past decade [5]. As of today, commercially available steerable systems include the manually steerable introducer
sheath Agilis NxT (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) [6], the
robotic catheter systems Sensei X and Magellan (Hansen Medical, Mountain View, CA, USA) [7], and the magnetic catheter
navigation system Niobe (Stereotaxis, St. Louis, MO, USA)
[8]–[10]. A number of studies [11]–[13] have shown significant
improvements in procedural time and patient safety by using
steerable catheters in interventional cardiology and electrophysiology, in contrast to using conventional nonsteerable ones. In
some cases, the use of steerable catheters even allowed successful treatments in cardiac patients who could otherwise not be
treated by a transcatheter approach [2], [14], [15]. This includes
cases in which percutaneous transcatheter closure of a patent
foramen ovale was challenging due to the unavailability of a
femoral venous approach [2], cases of cardiac ablation patients
having anatomical difficulties [14], and cases of percutaneous
aortic valve implantation in which an antegrade transvenous approach remained problematic [15]. The use of steerable catheters
allowed safe and successful treatment of these patients by facilitating manipulation of the catheter tip or by providing an
alternative route for the regular intervention. Additionally, the
use of steerable systems in cardiac ablations has shown greater
safety and procedural effectivity as a result of improved contact force management [16]–[18]. The belief that both relatively
simple as well as more complex transcatheter cardiac interventions will benefit from catheters with an actively steerable tip,
is, therefore, gaining more acceptance among the scientific and
clinical society. As these systems allow for accurate steering
and positioning of the tip at the required location, it is argued
that they may lead to a wider range of applications too, resulting
in less defined boundaries between the fields of interventional
cardiology and cardiothoracic surgery [2], [19]–[21].
However, with various degrees of steerability being available and numerous techniques being developed to achieve
this steerability, the different steering options along with their
advantages and disadvantages remain relatively unexplored. Additionally, the demand for steerability as well as the clinical applicability of the underlying steering technologies may differ per
type of procedure. Even though previous reviews have already

0018-9294 © 2016 EU

680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

addressed some aspects of catheter steerability [5], [21], [22],
a structured classification of different categories and subcategories of steerable catheters has not yet been presented. Such a
classification is essential for the understanding of contemporary
available steerable systems as it will provide insight into the
underlying steering technology. At the same time, such a structured overview may provide ideas for future design of steerable
systems as it sheds light onto unexplored and theoretically supported options. Finally, classifying existing technology has the
potential of providing a backbone for defining requirements and
future challenges toward application-driven design of steerable
catheters used in interventional cardiology and electrophysiology. With this review, we aim to provide such a structured
overview by classifying the underlying steering mechanisms in
steerable catheters. Fully exploiting the benefits of the classification, we have the additional aim of using it as a tool for defining requirements and challenges for future application-driven
design of steerable cardiac catheters.
II. CLASSIFICATION
For the benefit of the classification, the Medical Expo
database was consulted for an initial overview of all commercially available steerable catheters. Subsequently, the Espacenet
patent database was searched to include existing patents for
steerable catheters. Finally, the Web of Science database of scientific literature including the Medline collection was consulted
to include experimental prototypes of steerable catheters as well
as experiences with commercially available ones. The applied
search terms were subdivided into three categories: 1) motion
(steer∗ , deflect∗ , navigat∗ , articulat∗ , prebent∗ , preshaped∗ ),
2) medical region (card∗ , heart∗ , atri∗ , ventric∗ , vasc∗ ), and
3) instrument type (catheter, tube, tip, sheath, device, instrument). Keywords from at least two categories were combined in
each query, resulting in over 500 existing, patented, and experimental designs of steerable catheters. Because of the extensive
scope of the results, it was decided to limit the classification
to steerable catheters from the last 15 years (January 2000–
December 2015) with a few exceptions predating this period
due to their fundamentally novel or different techniques [27],
[32], [44]. For the benefit of presenting a complete overview of
available and potentially applicable steering technology, it was
additionally decided to include a number of catheters that were
not specifically designed for cardiac purposes.
Based on the actuation method in the distal tip, steerable
catheters were grouped under the term Actuation-Dependent
Steering to differentiate them from nonsteerable catheters. Subsequently, two categories of steering were identified, being
1) force generation in tip, in which an electric current is applied to the tip to generate a force and 2) force transmission to
tip, in which a force is transmitted from the proximal end to
the distal catheter tip. The former group consists of force generating steering mechanisms as a result of 1) electric actuation,
2) thermal actuation, or 3) magnetic actuation, whereas the latter group comprises force transmitting steering mechanisms as
a result of 4) hydraulic chamber actuation or 5) mechanic cable actuation. Each of these categories was further subdivided

into multiple subcategories to include all found results, as well
as allowing room for unelaborated future solutions. The results
are summarized in Fig. 1, which provides a complete schematic
representation. In the next sections, the results will be discussed
separately for each category together with the most recent examples of catheters, or in some cases similar instruments, using
the treated steering technology. Finally, future requirements and
challenges for steerable catheters are assessed based on steering and positioning capabilities, cardiac applications and safety,
and miniaturization potential, after which a final perspective is
given on the steerable catheter of the future.
III. ELECTRIC ACTUATION
Electric actuation in steerable catheters can rely on different
actuation mechanisms, yet in all cases, an electric current is provided to create a bending force and motion at the distal tip [23].
The electric mechanisms are classified as: 1) direct electric actuation and 2) indirect electric actuation. Direct electric actuation
includes a variety of electrically active materials which, after
application of an electric current, respond directly by providing a bending motion. Indirect electric actuation, on the other
hand, depends on the interaction between the electrically responsive material and a surrounding medium, after application
of the electric current. Despite the recent developments in both
categories, all known electrically actuated steerable systems are
currently experimental prototypes. Mainly due to the limitations
in achievable bending motion, the complicated manufacturing
processes, and questionable safety of materials in aqueous environments, none of the proposed methods has been accepted for
commercialization yet. The next paragraphs provide a detailed
discussion of both subcategories together with examples found
in literature.
A. Direct Electric Actuation
Direct electric actuation is based on the direct response of materials to an electric current by bending. These materials include
dielectric, piezoelectric, and ferroelectric materials. Although
they have the general drawback of low potential for torque motion, several of these materials have already been applied in
experimental prototypes of steerable catheters. Especially the
use of piezoelectric actuators in medical instrumentation has
gained more popularity over the past years as a result of their
simplicity, flexibility in design, precise positioning accuracy,
and high torque-to-weight ratio [24]. The process in which they
deform after application of an electric current, generally known
as the inverse piezoelectric effect, has allowed them to be used
as actuators that convert electrical energy into mechanical energy. In recent years, they have gained even more acceptance
due to their great potential for miniaturization and possibilities
for high output force [25].
Rogers [25] employed this potential by designing a piezoelectric ultrasonic micromotor, intended for application in a
robotic MIS microguidewire for treatment of cerebrovascular
complications.
Their 350-μm-diameter micromotor, called the Intellimotor
[see Fig. 2(a)], consists of a hollow cylindrical transducer with

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

681

Fig. 1. Complete schematic representation of all actuation methods in steerable catheters describing electric, thermal, magnetic, hydraulic chamber, and mechanic
cable actuation along with all subcategories.

682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 2. Applied electric actuation. (a) Rogers’ direct electric actuation comprising a piezoelectric ultrasonic micromotor [68]. (b) Schematic representation
of bending performance testing of Fang’s indirect electric actuation using an
IPMC actuator [28].

a number of slots inserted in the walls, placed on top of a
single lead zirconate titanate (PZT) piezoelectric element. When
an electric differential is applied across two opposite sides of
the PZT element, it causes the element to bend as a result of
piezoelectric strain coupling. Similarly, when an equal electric
potential is applied across both sides, the element is forced to
extend axially. The deformation of the PZT element causes the
transducer to periodically excite resonant vibrational modes,
with this driving a ball rotor. Depending on the shape of the
vibrational modes excited by the transducer, different output
motions can be obtained, including translation and rotation. By
coupling different vibrational modes, the micromotor was able
to deliver three degrees of freedom (DOF) reversible rotations.
Although Rogers’ micromotor design is still experimental, the
study showed that a piezoelectric micromotor could be applied
in a deflecting guide wire and seems promising for incorporation in other MIS instrument designs. However, disadvantages
related to the manufacture of piezoelectric ceramic materials
such as PZT, limit wide-scale use. Due to the resulting large
Young’s modulus, the achievable strain, and, thus, the bending
motion for these materials are limited [26].
B. Indirect Electric Actuation
Indirect electric actuation is based on the exchange of ions in
an electrolyte solution. Ion exchange-based actuation depends
on materials having a proton exchange membrane and metal
electrodes on both sides. Generally, applying a voltage (1–2 V)
to the material in an aqueous environment leads to ion migration
and redistribution, followed by a bending deformation toward
the anode. Included materials are polyelectrode gels, conducting
polymers, and ionic polymer-metal composites (IPMCs).
Guo et al. [27] were the first to incorporate an IMPC as bending actuator in a catheter tip design by using an active guide

wire having an IPMC on its distal end. Prototypes with outer
diameter ranging from 1–2 mm were designed having two DOF.
Intended for use during intracavity interventions and intravascular neurosurgery, the executed in vitro experiments of operability indicated future potential for the proposed applications.
More recently, Fang et al. [28] successfully developed a new
low-cost IPMC actuator for active cardiac catheter systems [see
Fig. 2(b)]. The actuator was tested in an aqueous environment
to investigate the dynamic behaviour. Although the response
time was relatively slow at 0.325 s, the bending motion at low
operation frequencies could be well controlled and the results
seemed promising.
Despite the advantageous characteristics of IMPC’s, several disadvantages exist for wide-scale application in steerable
catheters. One of the major disadvantages is the hydration requirement; the presence of an intermediate fluid for the power
output, and, thus, for the operation. The presence of any competing cationic species, such as naturally occurring in the blood
in the form of salts, contaminates the IPMC sample and disturbs
its functionality. Additionally, IPMCs are nowhere near the mechanical power output range when compared with hydraulic,
mechanic, or even piezoelectric mechanisms [29].
IV. THERMAL ACTUATION
Thermal actuation is the generation of a bending force and
motion when thermally active elements are actuated by an
electric current. When placed in the tip, these materials respond
to an increase in temperature, generating a deflection of the
tip. Shape memory alloys (SMAs) play a major role in thermal
actuation, using their shape memory effect. This effect allows
the material to transform between a high-temperature austenitic
phase and a low-temperature martensitic phase, resulting in a
different elastic modulus for each phase, as well as a different
output force and displacement. This ability makes SMAs excellent materials for microactuators which can generate large forces
and displacements. Additionally, SMAs have the ability to recover their original shape after being deformed over their elastic
limit. Several mechanisms with SMA microcoil actuators have
been developed, allowing for bending, extending/contracting,
and torsional and stiffness control [30]. However, none of the
proposed inventions are commercially available yet as a result
of their complicated manufacturing and assembly procedures
and due to the currently existing dangers of overheating [5]. In
terms of the proposed thermal actuation types, two main categories were found being: 1) isolated thermal actuation and
2) integrated thermal actuation.
A. Isolated Thermal Actuation
Isolated thermal actuation depends on the application of an
electric current to isolated thermal elements. These elements,
generally SMA’s, are located in or on the catheter tip and are
isolated from the catheter body. A number of different element
types are available with SMA wires, microcoils, and plate actuators being most common. Depending on the orientation of the
elements, certain advantages and disadvantages exist. Catheters
having isolated thermal actuation are, therefore, further

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

Fig. 3. Applied thermal actuation. (a) Schematic of Ayvali’s single-sided
isolated thermal actuation [31]. (b) Lim’s multisided isolated thermal actuation tip geometry [32]. (c) Mizushima’s microcoil geometry for an LIT [33].
(d) Langelaar’s integrated thermal actuation element [34].

classified in having 1) single-sided actuation and (2) multisided
actuation.
1) Single-Sided Actuation: Single-sided actuation typically
uses SMA wires which are placed along a single side of the
catheter tip. When one of the thermal elements is heated above
the transformation temperature by applying an electric current,
the length of the element contracts and leads to a bending of the
catheter. Due to the generally short contraction length of this
SMA element type, activation of one element would restrict
the (counter) motion of an opposite element. To prevent this
restriction, the SMA wires are generally placed at a single side
of the catheter.
An example of a steerable instrument having single-sided
actuation elements in the form of wire actuators is presented by
Ayvali et al. [31] [see Fig. 3(a)]. Their prototype was designed
having three straight stainless steel tip segments, connected to
each other by SMA wire actuators which are in direct contact
with power cables. Intended as a steerable delivery cannula for
percutaneous needle-based interventions such as prostate and
breast biopsy, a proof of principle experiment was executed
by testing the prototype in gelatine. Having inner and outer
diameters of 1.4, 3 mm, respectively, and being designed to
allow two DOF bending, the prototype was found to successfully
actuate each segment independently.
Although Ayvali’s design was able to allow two DOF bending, the use of such thermal actuators generally complicates

683

deflection. As the contraction length is relatively short, SMA
wires attached to the opposite side of the catheter generally restrict the bending motion. This makes it complicated to achieve
bending with a small radius of curvature [30].
2) Multi-Sided Actuation: The use of multisided actuation
elements, such as thermal microcoils and plates, allows a large
bending motion and multijoint actuation. By fixating SMA coil
or plate actuators at two opposing sites, a large bending angle is created on one side and results in passive extending of
the opposite side. Similar to wire actuators, coil actuators can
be actuated by direct application of a current. Several bending
motions, as well as torsional and extending motions can be realized by applying heat and changing the deformation shape of
the SMA.
In 1996, Lim et al. [32] proposed a multijoint and multidirectional catheter by using silicon-glass link structures [see
Fig. 3(b)]. They connected three joints in series, with each joint
having its own 250-μm-diameter SMA coil actuator that can
bend in any direction. Their work resulted in a prototype with
2.8 mm outer diameter and was intended for catheter-based interventions during minimally invasive diagnosis techniques and
percutaneous surgical treatments. In 2004, Mizushima et al.
[30], [33] proposed the technique to be applied in a long intestinal tube (LIT) which due to its length (> 3m) and insufficient
accuracy of the tip position, could benefit from such a construction. They developed an actively steerable LIT having an
NiTi SMA microcoil actuator placed in between an inner tube
and silicone outer tube [see Fig. 3(c)]. The prototype resulted
in an instrument with an external diameter of 6 mm, an internal lumen, and a one-directional deflection at the tip. Although
feasibility tests proved the functioning of the instrument, the
surface tip temperature did exceed critical values when bending
angles were maintained (> 41◦ C).
B. Integrated Thermal Actuation
Integrated thermal actuators provide both the catheter tip
structure as well as the actuation. The use of an integrated actuator has certain advantages over the use of an isolated actuator,
because it provides a design with fewer interconnected parts and
therefore an assembly that is less complicated. At the same time,
it provides the catheter with an outer structure and sufficient axial stiffness, which plays a major role in preventing energy loss
inside the mechanism. Integrated thermal actuators can be manufactured from a small diameter SMA alloy tube containing a
specific pattern manufactured by laser cutting or etching. By
applying heat to specific regions of the patterned tube, electrical
currents will be generated in the structure leading to temperature
changes at specific locations in the tube causing local bending.
Depending on whether the integrated actuation element serves
as an inner backbone or an outer structure, two types of integrated thermal actuation can be distinguished, respectively:
1) endoskeleton actuation and 2) exoskeleton actuation.
An example of an integrated thermal actuator is presented by
Langelaar and van Keulen [34] in the form of a laser-machined
SMA tube [see Fig. 3(d)]. They propose the use of a small diameter tube of NiTi alloy for the structure and actuation. Electrodes are attached to specific locations in the structure and upon

684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

applying voltages to them, heat is created in the structure, leading to a local change in temperature and local change in SMA
behaviour. This allows the catheter tip to bend at different positions. Intended for use as an active catheter during minimally
invasive procedures, a finite-element analysis was performed
that confirmed the potential of such a structure. The research
resulted in a prototype with a respectable degree of steerability
in two DOF and a 1.5 mm outer diameter.
Although Langelaar’s thermal actuator succeeds in reducing
the number of individual parts and simplifying the assembly, in
vivo operating conditions require operation in a narrow temperature range.
V. MAGNETIC ACTUATION
Magnetic actuation is generally based on alterations in a magnetic field, either internal or external, which is applied to the distal end of the catheter having (electro-)magnetic elements. The
resulting magnetic force has a specific magnitude and direction
and is determined by the properties of the (electro-)magnetic
elements, as well as by the magnetic field. By controlling the
strength and orientation of the field, the magnetically active
catheter tip can be steered inside the body. Two subcategories
are distinguished: 1) internal magnet actuation and 2) external
magnet actuation. Where internal actuators are placed and controlled inside the catheter, external actuators are placed inside
the catheter yet controlled by an external magnetic field.
A. Internal Magnet Actuation
Internal magnetic actuation relies on a locally created magnetic field. Because electromagnets have the ability to change
their magnetic field when the electric current is changed, they
are the most suitable magnetic elements for this type of actuator. Implanting electromagnets in a catheter tip requires multiple
electromagnets for multiple bending directions, as well as magnetically active elements and an energy supply.
An example of a catheter having internal magnet actuation
is described in the patent by Rioux et al. [35]. The magnetic
field is created inside a catheter with diameter 1.5–3 mm [see
Fig. 4(a)]. The patent suggests to manufacture the catheter shaft
from a biocompatible thermoplastic material and stainless steel
braid composite; additionally, a spring is meant to be positioned
inside the shaft to maintain the shape. A two DOF catheter is
proposed having four electromagnets implanted in the distal
tip, positioned at 90° relative to one another. A steering switch
will be connected per two electromagnets and allow electrical
current to be supplied to the two electromagnets. As a result,
the energized electromagnet can pull a magnetically attractive
element attached to the catheter tip, leading to a deflection of the
tip. Each steering switch will allow deflection in another plane,
and simultaneous activation creates deflection in a new plane.
Originally patented by Boston Scientific Scimed, Inc. (Marlborough, MA, USA), the design was intended as a catheter
for peripheral and cardiac procedures including angiography,
angioplasty, and stent implantation; however, none of the commercially available systems is known to be using this technique.
Moreover, even though the proposed design could theoretically

Fig. 4. Applied magnetic actuation. (a) Rioux’ internal magnet actuation [35].
(b) Schematic representation of external magnet actuation adopted from [21].

result in multi-DOF steering properties, the complexity of the
design would increase significantly and limit the functioning.
B. External Magnet Actuation
Similar to internal magnet actuation, external magnet actuation incorporates magnetic elements placed inside the catheter
tip. However, in this case, the elements are controlled from outside the catheter by an external magnetic field. The external
fields require a high degree of control and a precise positioning
of the patient with respect to them. Both externally placed electromagnets and permanent magnets are suitable to create such
a magnetic field.
A commercially available catheter control system of this type
is the Niobe Magnetic Navigation System (MNS) (Stereotaxis,
St-Louis, MO, USA) which contains two permanent magnets,
positioned at either side of the fluoroscopy table. Choi et al. [36]
used the system to control soft catheters having three magnets
on the distal tip during catheter ablation of AF. The magnets
allowed the catheter to align to the orientation of the magnetic
field created by the external permanent magnets. Furthermore,
the results of the trial showed that even though total procedure
times were significantly longer using the MSN, total fluoroscopic times remained significantly shorter, decreasing the radiation burden for both patient and clinician. The MNS proved
to be safe and effective in the procedure, with no complications reported in the MNS group (n = 41) versus eight cases
in the group treated with conventional nonsteerable catheters
(n = 70). Di Biase et al. confirmed these results and found that
the system facilitates standardization of the procedures and appears to impact the cure rate of AF patients by allowing more
effective lesions to be created [37]. Gudino et al. [38] took magnetic navigation a step further by using an array of independently
controllable steering coils on the catheter tip and deflecting the
catheter tip with the magnetic force created in a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) system. Based on this actuation method,
Liu and Çavuşoğlu [39] developed a 3-D kinematic model of an
MRI actuated steerable catheter carrying microcoils. They compared the computed tip locations with the experimental ones and

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

685

found a percentage error of less than 14%. Hetts et al. [40] used
such a steerable system with microcoils under MRI guidance
to evaluate the in vivo safety during endovascular navigation
in eight pigs. Due to heat being produced as a side effect of
the electrical currents at the catheter tip, the study was aimed
at determining the upper boundary of safe electrical currents in
a 1.5-T system. Their research demonstrated that coil currents
below 300 mA could activate the copper coils at the catheter tip
in ≤ 1 minute while no damage to vessel walls and surrounding
tissues (0/58 samples) was experienced. 25% (9/36 samples)
of the cases in which coil currents over 300 mA were applied
did experience vascular damage, indicating a safety boundary at
300 mA. Having found useful catheter tip deflection for currents
< 300 mA, the main challenges remain in reducing coil activation time and optimizing navigation at currents < 300 mA to
maximize the safety.
Research in the field of MRI navigation continues focusing
on improving coil activation times, procedural protocols for
safe catheter guidance, and optimization of the catheter design
including use of MRI appropriate materials [40]. Magnetically
steerable systems with external permanent magnets, on the other
hand, are currently commercially available and mainly used in
cardiac ablation procedures. A schematic representation of these
systems is presented in Fig. 4(b).
VI. HYDRAULIC CHAMBER ACTUATION
Hydraulic chamber actuation relies on the use of fluid pressure or properties to cause a bending force in a specific direction. Specific safety requirements need to be taken into account
for this category regarding the type of driving fluid. Additionally, because it remains difficult to continuously control catheter
bending and active steering, none of the proposed methods have
yet been commercialized. Based on the hydraulic actuators proposed in the found methods, two subcategories are defined
being: 1) static chamber actuation and 2) dynamic chamber
actuation. The former category consists of catheters having fluid
chambers with a static size and location, placed either in series or
parallel to one another. The latter category consists of catheters
having inflatable fluid chambers with a dynamic size and location, placed either internally or externally to the catheter tip
surface.
A. Static Chamber Actuation
Static chamber actuation in catheters generally depends on
fluid chambers in which the fluid pressure can be varied to
cause a bending motion toward a specific direction. These fluid
chambers are static in size and location and are typically embedded in the catheter walls. Static fluid chambers occur in two
variations: 1) serial chambers and 2) parallel chambers. In the
first type, the chambers are placed serially to one another, such
that they will allow pressure changes over the length of the
catheter tip. In the second type, the chambers are placed parallel
to one another and will allow the fluid pressure to be varied
along the circumference of the catheter.
1) Serial Chambers: Serial static chamber actuation depends
on fluid chambers that allow the fluid pressure to be varied along

Fig. 5. Applied hydraulic chamber actuation. (a) Ikuta’s static chamber actuation using serially connected bellows [41]. (b) De Boer’s static chamber actuation using parallel fluid chambers [43]. (c) Johansen’s internally located dynamic
chamber actuation [48]. (d) Skerven’s externally located dynamic chamber
actuation [49].

the length of the catheter tip. These mechanisms, therefore,
allow a bending motion with a specifically determined curve
in one direction. The different serially arranged chambers can
respond to different fluid pressures.
An example of a system having serial chambers is described
by Ikuta et al. [41]. This proposed system uses a “one input
multioutput” approach with parallel arranged bellows along the
length of the catheter tip which can be controlled independently
[see Fig. 5(a)]. A set of bellows and a band pass valve (BPV)
function as actuator at each joint in the tip design, while a single drive tube controls all the bellows. Different drive pressure
ranges are set for each BPV, so that when the inner pressure of
the drive tube is increased, only the target valve opens and only
the target bellows connected to this valve is supplied with fluid,
bending only the target joint. Intended for bending in narrow
blood vessels during diagnosis or treatment of vascular diseases, the prototype was miniaturized and led to a catheter with
3 mm outer diameter. Finally, a proof of principle and insertion
experiment showed that the two segments could be controlled
independently and that the two intended DOF were realized.
An advantage of a system having serial chambers is that a
number of bends with different curve angles can be obtained
along the length of the tip. However, allowing different possible
bends in a specific direction limits the number of planes in which
this can be applied, and, thus, limits the DOF.

686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Although Ikuta’s catheter is able to make S-shaped curves, it
cannot perform this in different planes. As each segment has a
single DOF, the combination of two segments will allow making
S-shaped curves, yet they will always direct the catheter tip in
the same direction. Applying a combination of serial and parallel
chambers could potentially overcome this challenge.
2) Parallel Chambers –: Parallel static chamber actuation
depends on fluid chambers that run over the circumference of
the catheter. These fluid chambers allow pressure changes and
bending motion over the catheter circumference by a decrease
or increase of the fluid supply. Fluid chambers which are placed
asymmetrically are among the options as well [42].
A typical example of a two DOF catheter of this type is presented in the patent by De Boer [43], although many others have
been developed or patented [44]–[47]. De Boer’s catheter design comprises four parallel steering chambers inside the walls
of the shaft, each of them filled with a pressurizable fluid [see
Fig. 5(b)]. The handle contains a control system with four push
buttons that are each coupled to one of the steering lumens.
By actuating one or multiple push buttons, the inner fluid pressure changes, creating a bending force in a certain direction.
Additionally, by actuating all push buttons simultaneously, the
stiffness and pushability of the catheter can be increased temporarily. Intended as a steerable catheter for multiple catheterbased interventions, the design is meant to facilitate the loading
of a guidewire inside the catheter lumen as well.
Because of the multiple long and small diameter fluid chambers running over the length of the catheter, a large catheter
diameter and long response time are the main disadvantages of
static chamber actuation. Application in catheters is only useful when direct manipulation is ensured to allow practical use
during beating heart interventions.
B. Dynamic Chamber Actuation
Dynamic actuators show many similarities to static actuators;
they contain fluid chambers with a variable fluid supply and
can be placed in a serial as well as a parallel configuration,
even though only parallel examples have been found. However,
two major differences are found between dynamic and static
chamber actuation regarding the fluid chamber properties and
the resulting bending motion. Because dynamic fluid chambers
are manufactured from flexible balloons, they can enlarge or reduce in size. This naturally leads to the fact that they cannot be
embedded within the catheter walls, but must be attached to the
internal or external surface of the steerable catheter tip, allowing
different sizes, shapes, and numbers of balloons. Additionally,
whereas in static actuators, an increase in fluid supply in one
chamber leads to a bending motion in the same direction, in dynamic fluid chambers, the same action leads to a bending motion
in the opposite direction. This can easily be explained by the
different function of the fluid chamber; in the static embedded
design, the fluid supply is increased to ensure motion through
pressurization, while in the dynamic inflatable design, the fluid
supply is increased to allow the fluid chamber to push itself
against anatomical structures to ensure motion in the opposite
direction. Depending on the location of the balloons, two types

of dynamic chamber actuators exist: 1) internal fluid chambers,
and 2) external fluid chambers.
1) Internal: Internal actuators have the advantage of allowing
a more homogenous outer tip diameter of the catheter; however,
they will allow a smaller number of fluid chambers to be placed
due to the limited internal space; thus, limiting the possible
DOFs.
An example of an inflatable internal actuator is described in
the patent by Johansen [48], meant for use during diagnosis
and treatment of intravascular occlusions. The proposed design
comprises a single deflection balloon which is placed inside
the catheter tip and surrounds a second flexible tube meant
as internal lumen for the insertion of other instruments [see
Fig. 5(c)]. The balloon is configured such that it is more likely
to expand toward one side than to another, and is connected to an
inflation port at the proximal end by a flexible tube. Pressurizing
the fluid will cause the balloon to inflate, resulting in a bending
force to the opposite side.
While Johansen’s design allows an internal lumen, incorporating a lumen generally goes at the cost of the preferred small
catheter diameter. A careful consideration, therefore, needs to
be made between implementing a sufficient lumen in a large
outer diameter catheter or a minimal lumen in a smaller diameter catheter. Additionally, due to the large size of the inflatable
balloons and the limited space inside the tip, the number of
balloons that can be implemented is limited, and, therefore, the
number of allowed DOF as well.
2) External: Externally placed dynamic chambers are generally attached to the external catheter tip surface, allowing multiple balloons to be incorporated. Most found examples have a
single asymmetric balloon or a number of parallel distributed
balloons.
An example of a catheter having parallel distributed external balloons is described in the patent by Skerven [49]. This
patent describes four external balloons, placed parallel on the
catheter tip wall, with each being separated from the other by
90° [see Fig. 5(d)]. Each balloon is connected to a fluid supply channel, which runs internally through the catheter wall
in longitudinal direction toward the control mechanism with a
pressurizable inflation source. Upon actuating the fluid supply
to one or more of the independently active balloons, the fluid
pressures are arranged nonsymmetrically around the centreline,
causing a bending force toward one side. The direction of the
bending force is opposite to the actuated balloons.
Although Skerven’s design allows for steering in at least four
directions and two DOF, the design requires a large space at the
anatomical location to enable the balloons to push against the
tissue wall. Intended for use during intracavity and intravascular
interventions, the proposed design limits the application to very
specific anatomic regions of the body.
VII. MECHANIC CABLE ACTUATION
Mechanic actuation describes the largest and most commercially available group of contemporary catheter actuation technology, based on cable or tendon actuated steering. Stainless
steel cables are most frequently incorporated in these catheters,

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

687

running from the proximal handle through the catheter shaft toward the distal tip where they cause deflection upon push/pull
motion of the cables. Stiffer polymeric tendons and Dyneema
pull wires are other options [50] which are particularly useful
in catheters meant to be used in an MRI setting. Two subcategories can be distinguished regarding the tip mechanism in
these catheters: 1) single segment actuation and 2) multiple segment actuation. The former group ensures deflection by using
steering cables together with a bendable catheter tip made from
a compliant material. The latter group provides deflection by
the relative movement between separate elements or joints as a
result of cable push/pull.
A. Single Segment Actuation
In single segment actuation, the steering depends on the use
of compliant segments being deflected by actuation of push/pull
cables. Based on the number and the orientation of the incorporated steering cables, four categories of single segment actuation are identified: 1) single cable, 2) multiple parallel cables,
3) multiple nonparallel cables, and 4) cable ring.
1) Single Cable: Actuation by a single cable is found in unidirectional catheters, generally designed for specific purposes
and for providing a specific curve in a single direction. Such a
mechanism may theoretically provide 1/2 DOF bending motion
by pulling the cable; however, choosing the cable material such
that it can also handle push, may result in a system having a
full DOF. To ensure flexible bending of the tip upon push/pull
movements of the cable, different compliant structures can be
used for the tip design. One method of doing so is by incorporating stiff elements in the tip to enhance the bending stiffness in a
specific reinforced plane. The other plane, in which the steering
wires are attached, is more flexible, and, thus, more likely to
deflect. Reinforcement materials may be incorporated in a specific plane, direction, or portion of the tip, hereby facilitating
bending in the opposed region.
An example of such an instrument is found in the patent by
Guo et al. [51] which present a catheter meant for cardiac ablation. The movement in their catheter tip is restricted to a specific
plane by reinforcements formed of relatively rigid polymeric or
metallic materials [see Fig. 6(a)]. In one example of a described
configuration, the reinforcements are placed in the sidewalls of
the steerable tip segment. Such a reinforcement plane enables
the catheter to deflect in one plane, called the sweeping plane,
while it restricts motion in other planes, providing a single DOF
as a whole.
Finding the appropriate material, that is able to resist both
push and pull, is a more challenging aspect in the development
of steering mechanisms using a single cable. Cable buckling
during push, for example, is a common limitation that may
block the steering motion. Using a single cable to provide only
one-directional bending lowers the risk of cable buckling, but
results in a limited catheter motion.
2) Multiple Parallel Cables: To allow omnidirectional bending and multiple DOF, multiple parallel cables can be used.
Generally, two cables are used to provide one DOF and bending
motion in a single plane, while three or four cables can be used
to provide two DOF and bending motion in multiple planes.

Fig. 6. Applied mechanic cable actuation. (a) Guo’s single cable, single segment actuation [51]. (b) Watson’s multiple parallel cables, single segment actuation [52]. (c) Wittenberger’s multiple nonparallel cables, single segment
actuation [56]. (d) Gerboni’s multiple parallel and nonparallel cables, single
segment actuation [57]. (e) Breedveld’s cable ring, single segment actuation
[58]. (f) Kabe’s serial segments actuation [60]. (g) Chow’s concentric segment
actuation [61]. (h) Hansen Medical’s Sensei Robotic Catheter [62].

Similar to the use of a single steering cable, the catheter is generally implemented with compliant structures to increase flexibility for bending. Different materials can be chosen in favour
of axial stiffness and bending flexibility. A number of different
materials, such as coils, braided materials, and flexible polymers, can be layered to obtain the different characteristics in
different directions. Additionally, materials with different bending properties in different directions can be applied to achieve
different curve angles.
An example of a steerable catheter having two parallel
arranged cables in combination with a compliant material is
described in the patent by Watson [52]. Intended for use during cardiac ablation, the technique results in an idea for an
asymmetric dual-directional steerable sheath. To obtain the two
asymmetric curves, materials such as nitinol or stainless steel
are incorporated in the tip to make use of their different lateral
bending properties [see Fig. 6(b)]. Two steering cables are used
that run from the proximal handle through the shaft to actuate
the flexible tip in both directions. The use of an asymmetric
flexible material results in a sharp curve in one direction and
a larger, arching curve in the other direction. Cardiac ablation
procedures can specifically benefit from this type of catheter,
because the bidirectional curvature allows multiple surgical targets during the same procedure and more precise manipulation
in accessing challenging locations such as the coronary sinus
[53]. A commercially available and frequently used catheter of

688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

this type, is the Agilis NxT Steerable Sheath (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) which provides bidirectional steering
with asymmetric curves [54]. Kimura et al. compared the steerable Agilis sheath with a nonsteerable catheter in 30 patients
undergoing cardiac ablation [55]. They evaluated contact force
according to sheath type, catheter position, and inadequate ablation. Their results indicated that using the steerable sheath, the
required contact force was reached more effectively, while the
maximum contact force could be limited to prevent perforations
by manoeuvring the catheter tip away. They conclude that the
contact force during fibrillation ablation is significantly different depending on the position of the catheter and the type of
sheath used.
3) Multiple Non-parallel Cables: Using multiple cables in a
nonparallel configuration has the advantage of allowing complicated curves. While a multitude of cables is used to obtain
a reliable tip deflection, the cables can be arranged separately
running through wire lumina, being guided by guidance rings,
or being wrapped around the catheter body.
An example of a mechanism having multiple nonparallel cables is described in the patent by Carroll et al. [56] in which
actuation wires are spiralled around an elastomeric tube catheter
to enable complex curves [see Fig. 6(c)]. Upon applying a tension force to the proximal end of the wires in the handle, the
spiralled wires in the distal end deflect the tip in a preshaped
complex curve. Adding multiple wires in different directions
will allow different predetermined curves to be made depending on the steering wire that is pulled. While such mechanisms
have the ability to make complex curves, they are generally only
suitable for specific interventions, such as cryoablations, where
predetermined paths need to be followed.
Gerboni et al. [57] developed a bioinspired instrument for
skull base surgery, having helically oriented steering cables used
in combination with parallel cables [see Fig. 6(d)]. The instrument, called the HelixFlex, is the first known steerable prototype
to use this combination in controlling the orientation as well as
the position of the tip. By using the concept of multiactuation,
a handle piece could be realized with a similar construction as
the tip. This resulted in a fully mechanical system having 18
steering cables, a rigid shaft, four DOF bending motion, and an
outer diameter of 5.8 mm. However, despite its future potential,
miniaturization of such a system for use in interventional cardiology could potentially complicate the mechanical design and
control.
4) Cable Ring: A cable ring mechanism consists of multiple
cables arranged in a ring and fully optimizes the available space.
The mechanism was first described in the patent by Breedveld
and Scheltes [58]. Their design is inspired by squid tentacles
which consist of a ring of longitudinal muscle bundles, making
the tentacle more robust against failure when one or more bundles have lost their functionality [see Fig. 6(e)]. Using stainless
steel cables to represent the ring of longitudinal muscle bundles
and an inner and outer spring for the circular muscle layers,
they developed a series of steerable endoscopes, instruments
and guidewires, the smallest being 0.9 mm in diameter and
having two DOF. The mechanism is currently being used to develop steerable instruments for a range of medical applications

including minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery, neurosurgery, and catheter-based interventions.
B. Multiple Segment Actuation
Unlike single segment actuation, multiple segment actuation
depends on the relative movement between components in the
distal tip, actuated by steering cables. Two types are identified:
1) serial segments and 2) concentric segments.
1) Serial Segments: Serial segments consist of multiple segments which are manoeuvrable with respect to each other. The
segments can be designed to have any favourable shape and can
be interconnected through different types of joints [59], allowing one, two, or multidirectional relative movement. The length
of the segments is determined based on the minimum bending curve that is required for the intended application. Multiple
segments can be combined together to form one steering segment, so that when the required number of steering cables is
incorporated, S-shaped curves can be achieved.
An example of such a catheter is described in the patent
by Kabe et al. [60], mainly intended for mitral valve repair
and other catheter-based interventions with device implantation. The proposed instrument uses different configurations of
stacked segments for a flexible tip [see Fig. 6(f)]. Each segment
is movable with respect to the next due to a connection with two
bearing joints on circumferentially opposite sides of the segment. The segments can be arranged so that all bearing joints
follow the same path, and, thus, allow motion in a single plane.
Additionally, when alternating the path of the joints for two
steering segments, the assembly allows motion in two planes
with four steering cables, providing two DOF.
2) Concentric Segments: Concentric segments allow the
catheter to deflect by extending the tip. Catheters of this type
contain a plurality of tubes placed inside each other near the tip.
Upon actuating a specific set of steering cables, one of the inner
and smaller diameter, tubes is extended through the tip. The
different tubes can each have a different preferred direction of
bending, depending on their construction and material, or they
can be steered actively depending on the number of steering
cables attached to each tube.
An example of such a catheter is described in the patent
by Chow [61], originally intended for cardiac and intravascular
diagnoses and interventions. In the proposed configuration, three
catheter portions are placed inside one another [see Fig. 6(g)].
One of those portions includes a flexible region that is able to
bend passively as a result of tissue contact or actively upon
pulling a connected steering wire, while all three portions are
able to move longitudinally and radially relative to the other ones
using steering cables or tendons. Depending on the number of
catheter portions and their ability to be steered actively, multiple
DOF motion can be reached.
A commercially available example of this type is the Sensei
X Robotic Catheter System (Hansen Medical, Mountain View,
CA, USA). Even though the system is controlled robotically,
the fundamental tip steering technology relies on two steerable
segments which are placed concentrically over one another [see
Fig. 6(h)]. Both segments can be controlled independently or
simultaneously by making use of a 3-D joystick or navigation

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

689

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF ALL EXAMPLES OF STEERABLE CATHETERS
Reference

Classification Category

Steering Mechanism

DOF

Intended
Instrument Type

Rogers [25]

Direct Electric Actuation

3

Indirect Electric Actuation

Piezoelectric, ultrasonic
micromotor
IPMC bending actuator

Guo et al. [27]
Fang et al. [28]

Indirect Electric Actuation

IPMC bending actuator

Ayvali et al. [31]

Langelaar and
van Keulen [34]
Rioux et al. [35]

Isolated Thermal Actuation
(Single Sided)
Isolated Thermal Actuation
(Multisided)
Integrated Thermal
Actuation
Internal Magnetic Actuation

Choi et al. [36]

External Magnetic Actuation

Gudino et al.
[38]
Niobe MNS

External Magnetic Actuation

Ikuta et al. [41]

Static Hydraulic Chamber
Actuation (Serial)
Static Hydraulic Chamber
Actuation (Parallel)
Dynamic Hydraulic
Chamber Actuation (Internal)

Lim et al. [32]

De Boer [43]
Johansen [48]

Skerven [49]

Guo et al. [51]
Watson [52]

Agilis NxT

Wittenberger
et al. [56]
Gerboni et al.
[57]
Breedveld and
Scheltes [58]
Kabe et al. [60]
Chow [61]
Sensei X
Robotic Catheter

External Magnetic Actuation

Dynamic Hydraulic
Chamber Actuation
(External)
Single Segment Mechanic
Actuation (Single Cable)
Single Segment Mechanic
Actuation (Multiple Parallel
Cables)
Single Segment Mechanic
Actuation (Multiple Parallel
Cables)
Single Segment Mechanic
Actuation (Multiple
Non-Parallel Cables)
Single Segment Mechanic
Actuation (Multiple
Nonparallel Cables)
Single Segment Mechanic
Actuation (Cable Ring)
Multiple Segments Mechanic
Actuation (Serial)
Multiple Segments Mechanic
Actuation (Concentric)
Multiple Segments Mechanic
Actuation (Concentric)

Intended Application

Product Phase

Cerebrovascular interventions

1

MIS robotic
guidewire
Guidewire
Catheter
Catheter

SMA wire actuators

2

Catheter sheath

SMA coil actuators

3 ×2

Catheter

Percutaneous needle-based
interventions
Catheter-based interventions

Laser machined SMA
tube
Tip electromagnets

2

MIS catheter

Catheter-based interventions

2

Catheter

Tip magnets + external
permanent magnets
Steering coil array +
MRI
Steering coils + external
magnetic field
Bellows + BPV

2
2

Ablation
catheter
Catheter

2

MNS

2

Catheter

Parallel hydraulic
chambers
Single internal balloon

2

Catheter

Peripheral and cardiac
interventions
Catheter ablation of
fibrillation
Catheter-based MRI
interventions
Catheter mapping and
ablation of fibrillation
Intravascular diagnoses and
interventions
Catheter-based interventions

Prototype proof of
principle
Prototype proof of
principle
Prototype proof of
principle
Prototype proof of
principle
Prototype proof of
principle
Prototype proof of
principle
Boston Scientific
Scimed, Inc., Assignee
Clinical trial

1

Catheter

Vascular occlusion
interventions

Parallel external balloons

2

Catheter

Intra-cavity and intravascular
interventions

Prototype proof of
principle
Commercially available
at Stereotaxis
Prototype proof of
principle
Johnson and Johnson
Assignee
Intraluminal
Therapeutics, Inc.,
Assignee
Wilson–Cook Medical,
Inc., Assignee

Single cable + tip
reinforcements
Parallel cables +
different bending
materials
Parallel cables +
different bending
materials
Spiralled actuation wires

1

Catheter

1

Catheter sheath

Catheter ablation of
fibrillation
Catheter ablation of
fibrillation

St. Jude Medical, Inc.,
Assignee
Boston Scientific
Scimed, Inc., Assignee

1

Catheter sheath

Catheter ablation of
fibrillation

1

Catheter

Catheter-based interventions

Commercially available
at Boston Scientific
Scimed, Inc., Assignee
Medtronic Cryocath LP
Assignee

Helical + parallel cables

4

MIS instrument

Minimally invasive skull-base
surgery

Prototype proof of
principle

Ring of cables

2

2

Endoscopic and
catheter-based interventions,
and neurosurgery
Mitral valve repair

Commercialized by
Deam Corporation

Stacked joints + cables

Endoscope,
catheter, MIS
instruments
Catheter

Concentric segments +
tendons
Concentric segments +
pull wires?

2

Catheter

4

Catheter sheath

Cardiac and intervascular
diagnoses and interventions
Catheter ablation of
fibrillation and mapping

2

buttons on the workstation to actuate the incorporated steering
cables [5], [62]. Originally intended for applications in electrophysiology, the system is able to make a variety of curves and
has been successfully used during cardiac mapping and ablation
procedures [5], [63]–[65].
VIII. FUTURE CHALLENGES
A. Applied Classification
The applied classification identifies fundamental differences
in steerable catheter technology. For each category, examples
have been found in patented, experimental, and commercially
available catheters, summarized in Table I.

Intracavity and intravascular
interventions
Cardiac interventions

Abbott Cardiovascular
Systems, Inc., Assignee
Abbott Cardiovascular
Systems, Inc., Assignee
Commercially available
at Hansen Medical

The developments found in electrically, hydraulically, and
thermally actuated catheters are of a high scientific value, still
being in an experimental and developmental phase. Some of
these actuators, while potentially enabling a further miniaturization in catheter diameter and an improvement in the precision of
steering, could potentially expand the field of cardiac applications. In order to do so, however, current shortcomings related to
safety, controllability, and response time need to be overcome
first. Magnetically actuated catheters are found to be moving
from the experimental scene toward the medical bench with
several magnetically steerable catheters already commercially
available. They allow the use of the produced heat in favour of
the intervention, such as during catheter ablation procedures,

690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

and are slowly gaining more acceptance. Additionally, catheter
navigation in the MRI is another growing field of research due to
the potential of combining visualization techniques with steering. Mechanically actuated catheters based on the use of steering
cables appeared to be the largest group in found examples. It
can be argued that this group allows the least complicated working principles and the most straightforward control methods by
using flexible materials and steering cables. Although most of
these mechanically actuated catheters are based on the same
basic working principle, a large variety of materials and constructions exist. The classification may be applied here to serve
as a design tool for future solutions in multiple ways. By presenting a complete overview of fundamental techniques, variations
to these can be considered by using other materials or constructions while maintaining the same actuation. Additionally,
combinations of existing techniques can be used to allow the
benefits of multiple categories to be combined into a single instrument, such as applied in the HelixFlex [57] which combines
parallel and nonparallel cables to obtain additional functionality. Finally, having identified the advantages and disadvantages
for each actuation technology, room is provided for optimizing
unelaborated solutions and allowing dedicated solutions in the
field of interventional cardiology and electrophysiology.
B. Steering and Positioning
The major challenge with respect to steering and positioning
the catheter, relates to moving the catheter toward the required
location and positioning or stabilizing the instrument tip under
physiological circumstances. Most of the commercially available steerable catheters have a tip that consists of a single segment and these systems do not allow motion in more than two
planes. The general challenge in catheter steering lies in increasing the motion possibilities in multiple planes. One method for
doing so is by subdividing the steerable tip into a number of
segments, with each segment being independently controllable
in two or more planes. However, such a construction may lead
to a more complicated control mechanism as well. Generally
speaking, an increase in DOF complicates the functioning of
the instrument as a result of assembly and control complexities.
Incorporating more magnetically, electrically, or thermally active elements could theoretically increase the number of DOF
in mechanisms having force generation inside the tip. A careful
consideration needs to be made between increased DOF and
feasibility factors such as simultaneous actuation of different
segments, precision of steering, and response time.
In steerable catheters having a force transmission to the tip,
the number of DOF is directly related to the number of available
fluid chambers or steering cables. Increasing the number of
fluid chambers will go at the cost of response time and catheter
diameter size, whereas increasing the number of cables comes
with typical mechanical challenges such as preventing friction,
buckling, and wedging of cables with each other or with the
surroundings. It remains important to carefully consider the
required number of DOF for a more effective, yet intuitively
controlled steerable catheter.
In the emerging new fields of interventional cardiology and
minimally invasive cardiac surgery, improved steering and

positioning of catheters could lead to major breakthroughs.
As clinical trials have reported beneficial effects in the use
of steerable catheters in interventional cardiology [11]– [15],
the next challenge lies in overcoming the difficulties presented
by the active cardiac environment. Optimizing catheter steerability for use inside the heart regardless of continuous blood
flow, beating heart motion, and lack of vessel wall support are
some of the factors to consider for treating cardiac patients
more effectively. A number of robotic systems have emerged
in recent years too, aimed at simplifying catheter steering and
precision, such as the Sensei X and Magellan Robotic Systems (Hansen Medical, Mountain View, CA, USA) as well as
the Amigo Remote Catheter System (Catheter Robotics, Inc.,
Mount Olive, NJ, USA). The field is currently in its infancy
mainly due to the high investment costs, large accompanying systems, requirements for integration in the catheter lab,
and the learning curve for the clinical experts due to a lack
of tactile feedback. However, significant advances are already
made in addressing some of the challenges presented by the
cardiovascular environment and moving toward beating heart
compensation [5], [21], [39].
C. Cardiac Application and Safety
In addition to the already complex physiological environment
of the heart in healthy subjects, cardiac patients are prone to suffer from calcified blood vessels, insufficient valve movements,
or beating irregularities. Steering without exposing anatomical
structures to greater risks, as well as minimizing the influence on
physiological processes are, therefore, crucial matters. The use
of steerable catheters in cardiology must, therefore, be adjusted
to the needs of specific interventions.
In addition, an inner lumen is required in most of these
catheters to allow interventional tools to be introduced. This
inner catheter lumen must remain sufficiently large for the insertion of functional tools that allow tissue manipulation or
device implantation. With regard to the suitability for cardiac
interventions and accompanying safety, electrically and magnetically actuated catheters generally cause an excessive amount
of heat, which could impose serious risk when not controlled
sufficiently. Moreover, small changes in blood temperature can
result in major effects, especially when it concerns cardiac patients who already experience difficulties in physiological blood
flow and are weakened as a result of sickness and age. The challenge in these designs, before allowing the use of these materials
in catheters, is focused on proving and improving their performance, speed, and controllability in blood [66].
Hydraulic catheters, on the other hand, use fluids where leakage always remains a possibility. Aside from the requirement of
using biocompatible fluids, it is important to understand whether
leakage of fluids in critical procedures is manageable. Some hydraulic catheters are equipped with externally placed balloons
that result in an irregular outer catheter surface and diameter.
This can potentially complicate their use in cardiac applications
where embolization risk increases with the insertion of irregularly shaped and large structures that disturb, or even obstruct,
the natural blood flow. Thermal catheters can potentially leak

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

electric current as opposed to fluid, possibly leading to critical
situations. Additionally, the incorporation of thermal elements
limits the available space left for the inner lumen through which
interventional tools must be inserted.
Magnetically actuated catheters, however, are already commercially available, yet more randomized controlled trials are
needed to prove clinical effectiveness and safety. The challenge
regarding the tip magnets requires a design that is more suitable for advancement in tortuous vessels and accordingly, there
remains a need to provide a steerable catheter capable of being
guided through the vasculature without the use of a guide wire.
Ideally, such a steerable catheter should be capable of being
advanced through the vascular system towards the heart, without constantly being pushed against the vessel walls. Similarly,
mechanically actuated catheters, such as those having multiple
segments, should not comprise any sharp or irregular edges that
can damage blood vessel walls or increase embolization risk. A
general challenge relates to allowing control of the instrument
so that it does not cause any confusion or complications for the
operator during cardiac interventions [66].
Despite the remaining challenges, experiences with steerable
catheters have shown great advantages and a relatively small
learning curve [2], [3], [5], [11]–[15]. Additionally, no adverse
events related to catheter steerability were reported for any of
the commercially available and used steerable catheters [2],
[3], [5], [11]–[15]. The main challenge is, therefore, found in
optimizing the steering, while adding improved functionalities
to enhance application possibilities and safety in the cardiac
environment.
D. Miniaturization Potential
The potential for miniaturization is related to cardiac applications and safety; reduced contact between the catheter tip and
the blood vessel walls diminishes the risk of damaging the vessels. Current dimensions of experimental and available steerable
catheters differ per category: ranging from 0.2 mm diameter of a
guide wire using a manoeuvrable electric micro-motor actuator,
to a 5-mm-diameter catheter using serial segments in mechanic
actuation.
The requirements for catheter size depend on the type of
intervention. During the implantation and positioning of transcatheter valves, the catheter diameter must be sufficiently large
to fixate the implant to the catheter tip. Similarly, the tip needs
to have sufficient axial and rotational stiffness to maintain the
stability of the valve while being fixed to the catheter tip. In
some interventions, for instance those that require an interseptal
approach, a 2-mm-diameter catheter is the maximally allowed
size.
In addition to minimizing the catheter size, the miniaturization of bulky and complicated control systems must similarly
be considered. In electrically actuated catheters, the use of direct electric actuators is among the leading options for actively
steerable catheter tips as they possess attractive characteristics
including large strain, low operation voltage, and high potential
for miniaturization [67]. For hydraulic catheters this remains
somewhat more complicated, as both sufficient fluid pressures

691

and more DOFs need to be reached while minimizing the diameter of the catheter. The parallel bellows design by Ikuta et al.
[41]; however, could be miniaturized from a test model with
6 mm diameter to a two-segments active catheter with 3 mm diameter. Currently available magnetic catheters have diameters
ranging between 2 and 3 mm diameter. However, the accompanying bulky systems which provide the external magnetic fields
require large investment costs with regard to the system as well
as the operating room. Using MRI to both visualize the cardiac
environment and provide an external magnetic field for catheter
steering, could minimize the costs. In mechanically actuated
catheters, the challenge lies in maximizing the number of DOF.
In doing so, typical mechanical problems, such as friction, buckling, and cable wedging suddenly become important factors. In
thermal actuators, the miniaturization depends on the miniaturization of the thermal elements. SMA microactuators show
great potential for miniaturization as a result of their ability to
generate large force and displacement.
Considering all available possibilities, one can conclude that
despite the fact that certain drawbacks still exist, miniaturization
techniques and materials show a promising future for smaller
diameter steerable catheters.
E. Ultimate Steerable Catheter of the Future
While a number of challenges remain essential to address,
new materials, actuators, and steerable systems are continuously designed and tested. Additionally, existing technology
provides greater potential when combined with different subcategories of steering to form a single steerable mechanism.
With the ultimate steerable catheter still being under construction, cardiac application demands the following fulfilments:
1) a multisteerable sheath which can be steered in multiple directions, with this simplifying insertion through tortuous vessels
and toward complicated anatomical structures, 2) a mechanism
that allows the tip to be stabilized and locked once it arrives at
the required location, so that it is not influenced by the physiological environment, 3) a second steerable catheter which can
be inserted through the first sheath to allow accurate tissue manipulation or implant placement, 4) an uncomplicated method
for control, preferably intuitive, and 5) a resulting device that
allows transcatheter cardiac interventions which were otherwise
complicated or not feasible.
IX. CONCLUSION
Having proposed a structured classification for the actuation
mechanisms in steerable catheters, a number of different categories and subcategories were identified. The classification was
able to provide insight into the technical aspects behind catheter
steerability and allowed new design opportunities to become
clear. A detailed discussion regarding the classification results
and future challenges for each category made it apparent that
we have come a long way, yet there are still challenges ahead.
While catheters are essential in cardiology, steerable ones may
provide an even more promising future for both cardiology and
cardiac patients.

692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Tobis and I. Abudayyeh, “New devices and technology in interventional cardiology,” J. Cardiol., vol. 65, pp. 5–16, 2015.
[2] S. Hascoet et al., “Successful percutaneous transcatheter patent foramen
ovale closure through the right internal jugular vein using a steerable
catheter,” Catheterization Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 82, pp. E598–
E602, 2013.
[3] F. Maisano et al., “Direct access transcatheter mitral valve annuloplasty
with a sutureless and adjustable device: Preclinical experience,” Eur.
J. Cardiothorac. Surg., vol. 42, pp. 524–529, 2012.
[4] J. Joseph et al., “Steerable sheath technology in the ablation of atrial
fibrillation,” Recent Pat. Cardiovasc. Drug Discov., vol. 8, pp. 171–177,
2013.
[5] H. Rafii-Tari et al., “Current and emerging robot-assisted endovascular catheterization technologies: A review,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 42,
pp. 697–715, 2014.
[6] (2016). [Online]. Available: http://professional.sjm.com/products/ep/
access/ep-transseptal-access/agilis-nxt-steerable-introducer
[7] W. Saliba et al., “Novel robotic catheter remote control system: Feasibility
and safety of transseptal puncture and endocardial catheter navigation,”
J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 17, pp. 1–4, 2006.
[8] C. Pappone et al., “Robotic magnetic navigation for atrial fibrillation
ablation,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 47, pp. 1390–1400, 2006.
[9] S.R. Atmakuri et al., “Initial experience with a magnetic navigation system for percutaneous coronary intervention in complex coronary artery
lesions,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 47, pp. 515–521, 2006.
[10] S. Ernst et al., “Initial experience with remote catheter ablation using a
novel magnetic navigation system: Magnetic remote catheter ablation,”
Circulation, vol. 109, pp. 1472–1475, 2004.
[11] S.C. Brown et al., “Use of a microcatheter in a telescopic system to reach
difficult targets in complex congenital heart disease,” Catheterization Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 73, pp. 676–681, Mar. 2009.
[12] A. Arya et al., “Long-term results and the predictors of outcome of catheter
ablation of atrial fibrillation using steerable sheath catheter navigation after
single procedure in 674 patients,” Europace, vol. 12, pp. 173–180, Nov.
2009.
[13] C. Piorkowski et al., “Steerable versus nonsteerable sheath technology
in atrial fibrillation ablation: A prospective, randomized study,” Circ. Arrhythmia Electrophysiol., vol. 4, pp. 157–165, Jan. 2011.
[14] K. Rajappan et al., “A randomized trial to compare atrial fibrillation
ablation using a steerable vs. a non-steerable sheath,” Europace, vol. 11,
pp. 571–575, Apr. 2009.
[15] J. G. Webb et al., “Percutaneous aortic valve implantation retrograde from
the femoral artery,” Circulation, vol. 113, pp. 842–850, Feb. 2006.
[16] M. D. Hutchinson et al., “Efforts to enhance catheter stability improve
atrial fibrillation ablation outcome,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 10, pp. 347–353,
2013.
[17] T. Kimura et al., “Operator-blinded contact force monitoring during pulmonary vein isolation using conventional and steerable sheaths,” Int.
J. Cardiol., vol. 177, pp. 970–976, 2014.
[18] W. Ullah et al., “Impact of steerable sheaths on contact forces and reconnection sites in ablation for persistent atrial fibrillation,” J. Cardiovasc.
Electrophysiol., vol. 26, pp. 266–273, 2015.
[19] T. Feldman and M. Moscucci, “Percutaneous therapies for valvular heart
disease,” in Grossman & Baim’s Cardiac Catheterization, Angiography,
and Intervention, M. Moscucci, Ed., 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Williams & Wilkins, 2014, p. 782.
[20] C. E. Mullins, “Congenital heart disease in the adult: Interventional therapy,” in Cardiovascular Medicine, J. T. Willerson et al., Eds., 3rd ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2007, pp. 311–340.
[21] Y. Fu et al., “Steerable catheters in minimally invasive vascular surgery,”
Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assisted Surg., vol. 5, pp. 381–391, Sep. 2009.
[22] L. Muller et al., “Remote control catheter navigation: Options for guidance
under MRI,” J. Cardiovasc. Magn. Reson., vol. 14, pp. 33–41, 2012.
[23] G. Krijnen and N. Tas. (2000, Nov.). Micromechanical Actuators. [Online]. Available: www.utwente.nl/ewi/tst/ . . . /el . . . /mems_actuators.pdf
[24] C. Yun et al., “Multi-degree-of-freedom ultrasonic micromotor for
guidewire and catheter navigation: The NeuroGlide actuator,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 100, pp. 164101-1–164101-4, 2012.
[25] G. W. Rogers, “Piezoelectric ultrasonic micro-motor system for minimally invasive surgery—The Intellimotor,” in Proc. AIP Conf., 2012,
pp. 705–708.
[26] M. Schwartz, Ed., Smart Materials. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2009, pp. 31–1–31-4.

[27] S. Guo et al., “Micro active guide wire catheter system—Characteristics
evaluation, electrical model and operability evaluation of micro active
catheter,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Micro Mach. Hum. Sci., 1995,
pp. 131–136.
[28] B. Fang et al., “A new approach to develop ionic polymer-metal composites (IPMC) actuator: Fabrication and control for active catheter systems,”
Sens. Actuator A, Phys., vol. 137, pp. 321–329, Apr. 2007.
[29] S. Nemat-Nasser and C. W. Thomas. (2016). Ionomeric PolymerMetal Composites. [Online]. Available: http://ceam.ucsd.edu/documents/
papers/ch6.pdf
[30] Y. Haga et al. (2010). Active Bending Catheter and Electric Endoscope Using Shape Memory Alloys. [Online]. Available: http://www.
intechopen.com/books/shapememory-alloys/active-bending-catheterand-electric-endoscope-using-shape-memory-alloy
[31] E. Ayvali et al., “Towards a discretely actuated steerable cannula for
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 31,
pp. 588–602, Apr. 2012.
[32] G. Lim et al., “Future of active catheters,” Sens. Actuator A, Phys.,
vol. 56, pp. 113–121, 1996.
[33] M. Mizushima et al., “Active bending long intestinal tube using shape
memory alloy,” in Proc. Asia-Pac. Conf. Transducers Micro-Nano Technol., 2004, pp. 893–896.
[34] M. Langelaar and F. van Keulen, “Modeling of a shape memory alloy
active catheter,” presented at the Structures Structural Dynamics Materials
Conf., Palm Springs, CA, USA, 2004.
[35] R. Rioux et al., “Magnetically steerable catheter assembly,” U.S. Patent
2009/0062789 A1, Mar. 5, 2009.
[36] M. S. Choi et al., “Comparison of magnetic navigation system and convention method in catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: Is magnetic navigation system more effective and safer than conventional method?” Kor.
Soc. Cardiol., vol. 41, pp. 248–252, 2011.
[37] L. Di Biase et al., “Remote magnetic navigation: Human experience in
pulmonary vein ablation,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 50, pp. 868–874,
2007.
[38] N. Gudino et al., “Control of intravascular catheters using an array of
active steering coils,” Med. Phys., vol. 38, pp. 4215–4224, 2011.
[39] T. Liu and M. C. Çavuşoğlu, “Three dimensional modelling of an MRI actuated steerable catheter system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2014, pp. 4393–4398.
[40] S. W. Hetts et al., “Endovascular catheter for magnetic navigation under MR imaging guidance: Evaluation of safety in vivo at 1.5T,” Amer.
J. Neuroradiol., vol. 34, pp. 2083–2091, 2013.
[41] K. Ikuta et al., “Safety-active catheter with multiple-segments driven
by micro-hydraulic actuators,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.Assisted Intervention Conf., 2002, pp. 182–191.
[42] Y. Haga et al., “Small diameter hydraulic active bending catheter using
laser processed super elastic alloy and silicone rubber tube,” in Proc. IEEE
EMBS Spec. Topic Conf. Microtechnol. Med. Biol., 2005, pp. 245–248.
[43] J. De Boer, “Multi-lumen steerable catheter,” U.S. Patent 2007/0060997
A1, Mar. 15, 2007.
[44] Z. Galel, “Catheter steerable by bidirectional jets with remotely controlled
closures,” U.S. Patent 5 476 100, Dec. 19, 1995.
[45] D. Gesswein, “Articulating guide catheter,” U.S. Patent 2004/0186378
A1, Sep. 23, 2004.
[46] G. Vanney, “Steerable and shapable catheter employing fluid force,” U.S.
Patent 2005/0004516 A1, Jan. 6, 2005.
[47] K. C. Kennedy II, “Steerable catheter devices and methods of articulating
catheter devices,” WO Patent 2007/053625 A1, May 10, 2007.
[48] J. A. Johansen, “Deflecting catheter, U.S. Patent 2004/0116851 A1, Jun.
17, 2004.
[49] G. J. Skerven, “Segmented balloon for catheter tip deflection,” U.S. Patent
2010/0168665 A, Jul. 1, 2010.
[50] R. Hayzelden and W. E. Webler, “Deflectable catheter having compression
compensation mechanism,” U.S. Patent 8 016 784 B1, Sep. 13, 2011.
[51] X. Guo et al., “Deflectable catheter with distal deflectable segment,” WO
Patent 2009/085470 A1, Jul. 9, 2009.
[52] J. R. Watson, “Asymmetric dual directional steerable catheter sheath,”
U.S. Patent 2013/0317498 A1, Nov. 28, 2013.
[53] Boston Scientific. (2014, Aug. 1). Electrophysiology Products Catalog.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bostonscientific.com/en-US/products.
html
[54] (2016). [Online]. Available: http://www.stereotaxis.com/index.php
[55] T. Kimura et al., “Operator-blinded contact force monitoring during pulmonary vein isolation using conventional and steerable sheaths.” Int.
J. Cardiol., vol. 177, pp. 970–976, 2014.

ALI et al.: STEERABLE CATHETERS IN CARDIOLOGY: CLASSIFYING STEERABILITY AND ASSESSING FUTURE CHALLENGES

[56] S. Carroll et al., “Defined deflection structure,” E.P. Patent 2 289 589 A2,
Mar. 2, 2011.
[57] G. Gerboni et al., “HelixFlex: Bioinspired maneuverable instrument for
skull base surgery,” Bioinspir. Biomim., vol. 10, pp. 066013-1–066013-17,
2015.
[58] P. Breedveld and J. S. Scheltes, “Instrument for fine-mechanical or surgical
applications,” U.S. Patent 2008/0234545, Sep. 25, 2008.
[59] F. Jelı́nek et al., “Classification of joints used in steerable instruments for
minimally invasive surgery—A review of the state of the art,” J. Med.
Devices, vol. 9, pp. 010801-1–010801-11, 2015.
[60] A. N. Kabe et al., “Steerable assembly for surgical catheter,” U.S. Patent
2014/0135685 A1, May 15, 2014.
[61] M. Chow, “Deflectable catheter assembly,” U.S. Patent 8 118 803 B1, Feb.
21, 2012.
[62] (2016). [Online]. Available: http://www.hansenmedical.com/us/en/
cardiac-arrhythmia/sensei-robotic-system/product-overview
[63] L. Di Biase et al., “Ablation of atrial fibrillation utilizing robotic catheter
navigation in comparison to manual navigation and ablation: Single center
experience,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 20, pp. 1328–1335, 2009.
[64] W. Saliba et al., “Atrial fibrillation ablation using a robotic catheter
remote control system: Initial human experience and long-term follow-up
results,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 51, pp. 2407–2411, 2008.
[65] P. Kanagaratnam et al., “Experience of robotic catheter ablation in humans
using a novel remotely steerable catheter sheath,” J. Interventional Cardiac
Electrophysiol., vol. 21, pp. 19–26, 2008.
[66] C. Fan et al., “Review of manual control methods for handheld maneuverable instruments,” Minimally Invasive Ther. Allied Technol., vol. 22,
pp 127–135, 2013.
[67] K. K. C. Lee et al., “Fabrication and characterization of lasermicromachined polypyrrole-based artificial muscle actuated catheters,”
Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 153, pp. 230–236, 2009.
[68] G. Rogers, “Three degree-of-freedom piezoelectric ultrasonic micromotor with a major diameter of 350 μm,” J. Micromech. Microeng.,
vol. 20, pp. 125002-1–125002-5, 2010.

Awaz Ali received the B.Sc. degree in life sciences
and technology with a major in biomedical engineering from the University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands, in 2011, and the double Erasmus
Mundus M.Sc. degrees in biomedical engineering
from Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, in 2012, and
from RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
in 2013. During her M.Sc. studies, she developed a
major interest in cardiovascular engineering and design. She started doing research on the optimization
of vascular stents and the design of transcatheter heart
valves. She ended her specialization in the field of artificial organs and implants
by optimizing and redesigning a ventricular assist device toward minimized
thrombus formation. Eager to continue her work in the field of cardiac engineering and instrument design, since beginning 2014, she has been working toward
the Ph.D. degree at the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
While working toward the Ph.D. degree in a multidisciplinary environment,
she is developing a multisteerable catheter for complex cardiac interventions,
focusing on applications in mitral valve repair, cardiac ablation (mechanical
contact force management), and endomyocardial biopsy.

693

Dick H. Plettenburg (M’05) received the B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degrees in mechanical engineering from
the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 1977 and 1981 respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in mechanical engineering design from the
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, in 2002.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the Department of Biomechanical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, the Director at the Delft Institute of Prosthetics and Orthotics, Delft, the Coordinator for the Biomedical Engineering educational programs of the Delft University
of Technology, and a Member of several rehabilitation treatment teams in The
Netherlands. His research interests include mechanical engineering design, upper extremity prosthetics, and miniature pneumatics.
Dr. Plettenburg is a Member of the International Society for Prosthetics and
Orthotics and an Associate Editor of the Prosthetics and Orthotics International.

Paul Breedveld received the M.Sc.(Hons.) and
Ph.D.(Hons.) degrees in mechanical engineering
from the Delft University of Technology (TU
Delft), Delft, The Netherlands, in 1991 and 1996,
respectively.
Extending his experience in space robotics to the
medical field, he continued his research with developing ingenious surgical devices inspired by smart solutions in nature, sponsored by a personal research grant
from the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences. Collaborating with a number of academic
hospitals, medical companies and technical and biological research groups, the
research within Breedveld’s group BITE (Bio-Inspired Technology) has resulted
in a number of patents that are being commercialized by (spin-off) companies.
Dr. Breedveld being a Member of the BIOKON International Bio-mimetics
Association, having received a number of prizes and awards, and being a leading
Researcher in a number of (inter-)national research programmes, his research
received an award in 2012 with a prestigious Dutch VICI research grant on
the development of dendritic manoeuvrable devices for endonasal skull base
surgery, and in 2013, with an Antoni van Leeuwenhoek personal professorship
at TU Delft. In 2014, he became Chairman of the Board of Examiners of the
Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering of TU Delft.

