Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

Journal self-citations—Analysing the JIF mechanism
Tove Faber Frandsen
Department of Information Studies, Royal School of Library and Information Science, Copenhagen S., Denmark
Received 29 June 2006; received in revised form 30 August 2006; accepted 5 September 2006

Abstract
This paper investigates the mechanism of the Journal Impact Factor (JIF). Although created as a journal selection tool the indicator
is probably the central quantitative indicator for measuring journal quality. The focus is journal self-citations as the treatment of
these in analyses and evaluations is highly disputed. The role of self-citations (both self-citing rate and self-cited rate) is investigated
on a larger scale in this analysis in order to achieve statistical reliable material that can further qualify that discussion. Some of the
hypotheses concerning journal self-citations are supported by the results and some are not.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Self citations; Journal Impact Factor; Multiple linear regression

1. Introduction
The increased attention on Journal Impact Factor (JIF) as a crucial criterion of evaluation has according to Kaltenborn
and Kuhn (2004) led authors and editors more or less voluntarily to adapt their publication strategy to a maximation of
JIF. Editors seek to understand the impact factor calculation so that they can manipulate it to their journal’s advantage
(Jennings, 2001). Miller (2002), Neuberger and Counsell (2002) and Sevinc (2004) all reported that a manuscript
submitted was returned by the editor requesting the author to add irrelevant references from that journal. This implies
that the risk of editors manipulating JIF by increasing the number of journal self-citations is present.
The use and importance of journal self-citations is highly debated. The treatment of self-citations in analyses and
evaluations has been discussed heavily and relates to how we should interpret self-citations. According to Hyland
(2003) repeated self-citation accentuates one’s credibility or expertise and may perpetuate one’s interpretations or
opinions of specific research findings or general constructs. According to Gami, Montori, Wilczynski, and Haynes
(2004) critics of the impact factor (IF) as a metric of journal importance have noted the bias that results from journal
self-citation but little is known about the impact of self-citations. However we cannot just ignore the existence of
journal self-citations. According to Van Raan (1998b) self-citations cannot be neglected and it is necessary to perform
corrections to avoid distortions. White (2001) also stressed that self-citations are not an insurmountable difficulty as
they can be excluded from the analyses. But nevertheless self-citations are most often included in the calculation of
JIF and could potentially have an effect on the results. Aksnes (2003) pointed out that on aggregated levels such as on
national levels self-citations do not pose a problem assuming that they level out but at lower levels self-citations could
potentially be a serious problem as there are great variances among, e.g. disciplines.
Models for interpreting the self-citation rates have been suggested (Rousseau, 1999) and a few investigations exist
that relate self-citations to JIF (Fassoulaki, Paraskeva, Papilas, & Karabinis, 2000; Smart & Elton, 1982). But the former
E-mail address: tff@db.dk.
1751-1577/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.joi.2006.09.002

48

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

only included the self-cited rate and the latter consisted of limited data material. The main objective of this analysis is
to relate self-citations to JIF. The role of self-citations (both self-citing rate and self-cited rate) will be investigated on
a larger scale in this analysis in order to achieve statistical reliable material that can further qualify the discussion.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 surveys the research already existing within this field. Section 3 then
presents and discusses the collected data and the chosen methods, followed by Section 4 with the results of the analysis.
Section 5 contains conclusions and a discussion of the perspectives of the paper.
2. Overview of the existing literature
A large corpus of earlier research exists regarding self-citations and in order to keep some overview of the research
we divide it into theoretically oriented and empirically oriented research. Please note that the focus here is on journal
self-citations and not so much on other variations of self-citations such as author self-citations, country self-citations
and institution self-citations (Eto, 2003). We begin with the theoretically oriented research noting that there are several
interesting suggestions on how to evaluate and understand self-citations.
Self-citations have been translated into quantifiable measures in various forms. Rousseau (1999) defined a journal
self-citation as a paper published in a journal citing papers published in the same journal. Self-citations and thus
also journal self-citations have been classified by several. Lawani (1982) divided self-citations into two types called
synchronous and diachronous self-citations. The synchronous rate is calculated as the citations to itself relative to the
total number of references in the journal. The diachronous rate is calculated as the journal’s number of self-citations
relative to the total number of citations received by the journal. According to Lawani (1982, p. 282) the former is not
necessarily an expression of egoism whereas on the other hand the latter is an expression of egoism as we see little
or no recognition from other journals. White (2001) questioned this use of the two indicators of self-citations stating
that “[w]hile Lawani’s approach is intriguing, he reads egotism, usually a durable quality of personality, into data that
are beyond authors’ control and whose proportions can change: a sudden influx of citations from others could turn
today’s monster of vanity into a decent, humble fellow overnight. The charge should perhaps be reserved for failings
more clearly personal, such as citing one’s own work when it is irrelevant. I would even argue that abnormally high
self-citation in [. . .] the synchronous rate [. . .] would be a better measure of egotism; at least it would reflect behaviour
attributable to the citer. A high diachronous self-citation rate, on the other hand, seems more an indicator of what might
be called intellectual isolation (true egotists prefer undiscoveredness). In any case, if egotism is defined as excessive
self-citation, the burden of proving excess is on the definer”. Egghe and Rousseau (1990) classified self-citations in
two indicators: self-citing rate and self-cited rate. Self-citing rate relates a journal’s self-citations to the total number
of references it gives. Self-cited rate relates a journal’s self-citations to the number of times it is cited by all journals,
including itself. So basically the only thing differentiating the typologies by Lawani and Egghe and Rousseau is the
terminology. Here, we choose to use the terminology suggested by Egghe and Rousseau (1990) and the mathematical
definition of self-citations based on Garfield (1974) is illustrated by Table 1.
Journal J cites itself a times; it cites other journals b times. Journal J is cited by other journals c times. The self-citing
rate is a/(a + b); the self-cited rate is a/(a + c).
Rousseau (1999) furthermore suggested that a high self-cited rate could be an expression of low visibility of the
journal. Self-cited rates of leading journals would be expected to be low and the other way around for more peripheral
journals. A high self-citing rate on the other hand is a sign of low visibility of the field covered by the journal and journals
with high self-citing rates would tend to be more specialised. He also stressed that one should note that self-citations
typically contain a different kind of information than other citations as they often contain intra-journal information
(Rousseau, 1999). According to Gami et al. (2004) self-citations serve necessary functions. It allows expanding on
Table 1
Journal self-citation table
Citing journals

J
O

Cited journals
J

O

a
c

b
–

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

49

previous hypotheses, refer to established study designs and methods, and justify further investigations on the basis of
prior results. Hence, he argues, self-citations may be inevitable when the published data are only published in a single
journal.
Turning to the more empirically oriented research we note that little work exist that relate self-citations to JIF on a
larger scale in order to test some of the models of interpretation suggested. Several empirical analyses focus on journal
self-citations and some of these are: Pichappan (1995) indicated that the self-citing rate of a journal is affected not
only by the length of existence of the journals, but also by the source articles of the journal cited and citing it. Snyder
and Bonzi (1998) showed that motives to self-cite are the same as motives to cite others. Furthermore, they showed
that there are large differences in the number of self-citations among disciplines but the number is constant within
disciplines. Van Raan (1998a) stressed the importance of the size of the data material. It is very unlikely that all authors
have the same biases and therefore a large dataset will reduce the differences. Van Raan (1998b) and Moed (2000)
showed that the impact of research results is affected by the degree of international cooperation but the increased
impact is not exclusively due to self-citations because even after correcting for self-citations the impact is still greater.
This finding was also supported by Aksnes (2003).
Rousseau (1999) investigated the amount of self-citations in 10 highly estimated journals and 10 randomly chosen
journals. He finds that self-citations are given earlier after publication than non-self-citations. Fassoulaki et al. (2000)
investigated six journals for both self-citing rate and self-cited rate. Although not statistically significant they find a
correlation between self-citing rate and JIF. Although restricted by the limited period of analysis and only including
a single journal Peritz and Bar-Ilan (2002) found a highly increasing tendency to journal self-citations. They point
to an increased significance of the journal during the period as an explanation. Rousseau and Small (2005) showed
an example of a cycle of citations within the same journal issue. These journal self-citations emerged on the basis
of an invisible college exchanging preprints. Finally, Tsay (2006) investigated self-citations of the most productive
semiconductor journals and found that high self-citing journals are usually older, more productive and higher cited
than low self-citing journals.
3. Data
The analysis in the present paper is a case study based on a number of economics journals. It is necessary to collect a
rather homogeneous dataset in order to keep the number of variables at a reasonable level. Glänzel and Moed (2002, p.
178) stressed that JIF is field-specific biased and therefore one way of limiting the dataset is to use journals from only
one science. A group of economics journals was selected on the basis of criteria set up by Kalaitzidakis, Mamuneas,
and Stengos (2003) which ensured that the journals were scientific and belonged primarily to the social science of
economics. Furthermore, the journals had to be indexed throughout the entire period in Social Science Citation Index
(SSCI). A sample of 32 journals fulfilling these criteria was selected randomly and is shown in Appendix A.
Preliminary searches conducted before the start of the actual analysis showed that before the mid-1980s the number
of observations in the data material is too small so the initial publication period used in the analysis is 1986 as it involves
data from 1984 to 1985 when calculating the synchronous JIF. The last publication period is 2002 with corresponding
citation period for the 3-year diachronic JIF of 2002–2004.
An overview of the variables is available in Appendix B and a short description follows here: the number of citations
is used as a dependent variable in four different versions. To extend the indications of the analyses to more than just one
JIF-calculation we calculated four different JIFs. The robustness of the results does not depend on the particular JIF
chosen as we employed both synchronous and diachronous JIF. The formulas for calculating both the synchronous and
the diachronous JIFs are available in Frandsen and Rousseau (2005). There are two formulations for the general case
depending on whether we treat each publication year differently but as we only operate with one publication year we
can use either of the formulations. We employed two 2-year synchronous JIFs which means a 2-year publication period
and a 1-year citation period is used. This means that the analysis will include the citations over 1 year to publications
from 2 years, e.g. citations in 1986 to articles published in 1984–1985. One was calculated as done by the ISI and one
also including the document type letter in the denominator as recommended by Christensen, Ingwersen, and Wormell
(1997). Furthermore, we used a 3-year diachronous JIF and a 5-year diachronous JIF. The length of the citation window
must be set in accordance with the degree of obsolescence of articles within the economics literature since we want to
include a large percentage of the total number of citations received. Only a few investigations of obsolescence within
economics have been made. One of the few is Dorban and Vandevenne (1991) and according to their investigation

50

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

we only captured 24 percent of the citations using a citation window of 4 years but in order to perform analyses on
relatively recent data we had to compromise and therefore we chose the 5-year citation period as the longest.
The time variable captures a possible development over time. By adding this variable it is possible to capture if JIF
in general increases or decreases over time which could be the case if the number of included journals in the citation
databases increases or decreases during the period leading to more or less possible journals to cite.
The number of self-citations is described by two related but different measures. The self-citing rate relates a journal’s
self-citations to the total number of references it gives. Self-cited rate relates a journal’s self-citations to the number of
times it is cited by all journals, including itself. In this analysis we calculate them both. The self-cited rate is calculated
after using the correction technique suggested by Christensen et al. (1997). As we will explain later in Section 4 there
are reasons to believe that the relation between JIF and self-cited rate is not linear per se therefore we also construct a
variable describing the relationship as non-linear. That is done by computing a variable as 1 divided by the self-cited rate.
As we wish to control for other factors that might influence the results we add several variables that describe other
aspects of the journals included in the analysis. The variables included here are chosen as they are expected to affect the
distribution of JIF across journals. Others could have been chosen and that could potentially alter the outcome of the
analyses. Future analyses will have to investigate if other factors influence the JIF and we focus on variables describing
document types and geographic relations. We record the composition of document types each year. The documents
are divided into seven categories namely: article, review, letter, note, editorial, book review and other. The categories
consist of just the document type indicated in the category label. Only exception is the category other that consists of
discussion, item about an individual and that sort of publications. These document types have been aggregated in this
category as the dataset revealed so few of them and the use of them varies considerably over the years. Furthermore,
we register the total number of publications of each journal, the share of documents with scientific content (article,
review, letter and note) and the number of documents included by the ISI (article, review and note).
A variable describes the geographical location of the journal and is constructed by determining the place of publication. We are primarily interested in the few journals not originating from North America in order to describe the
geographical periphery of science. This geographic location of a journal is determined by using Ulrich’s International
Periodicals Directory. When using Ulrich’s for determining the geographic location it can be problematic for journals
published by, e.g. Elsevier who are registered in Ulrich’s as being published in The Netherlands while the reality may
be different. But for this analysis we have to rely on the directory, as it can be almost impossible to establish a certain
geographic location. Should all journals without certain geographic location have been discarded from the analysis
it would have left us with very limited material as can be seen in Frandsen (2005). The second variable concerning
geographical relations is constructed in order to record the languages of the journals and is computed as the share
of documents not written in English. We could also have added a variable on the geographic location of the authors
publishing in the journal but as the main focus point here is not geographic relations we restrict the variables on
geographic relations to the two mentioned here.
Different estimation equations were used in order to analyse the data material. A minor analysis took place before
the central main analysis. But both of these analyses consisted of variables already available through the main analysis.
Furthermore, we analysed the degree of self-citing rates in order to see if the degree of self-citing could be explained
by some of the other variables describing the journals. We analysed self-citing rate as the dependent variable and the
estimation equation we used is as follows:
Self-citing ratei,t = β0 + β1 (total number of documentsi,t ) + β2 (documents included in the ISI-JIFi,t )
+β3 (geographic location of journali,t ) + β4 (trendt ) + β5 (scientific content share of totali,t )
+β6 (share of non-English languagei,t ) + β7 (articlei,t ) + β8 (reviewi,t ) + β9 (letteri,t )
+β10 (notei,t ) + β11 (editoriali,t ) + β12 (book reviewi,t ) + β13 (otheri,t ) + ui,t
where i denotes the journal whereas t the time period, β0 the constant and ui,t denotes the error term.
Finally, we analysed the dataset using various forms of JIFs as the dependent variable. We wanted to be able to
understand and explain the actual JIF-value of each journal. The estimation equation we used is as follows:
JIFi,t = β0 + β1 (self-cited ratei,t ) + β2 (self-citing ratei,t ) + β3 (geographic location of journali,t )
+β4 (documents included in the ISI-JIFi,t ) + β5 (total number of documentsi,t )

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

51

+β6 (share of non-English languagei,t ) + β7 (articlei,t ) + β8 (reviewi,t )
+β9 (letteri,t ) + β10 (notei,t ) + β11 (editoriali,t ) + β12 (book reviewi,t )
+β13 (otheri,t ) + β14 (trendt ) + β15 (scientific content share of totali,t ) + ui,t
where i denotes the journal whereas t the time period, β0 the constant and ui,t denotes the error term.
We have to bear in mind that we cannot compare the coefficients from one JIF regression to another as they cannot
be compared across different analyses. But it gives us an opportunity to see which variables explain the JIF statistically
significant and to see if the picture depicted is the same for all JIF types analysed.
For these analyses the three Dialog Classic implementations of Arts & Humanities Citation Index (A&HCI), Science
Citation Index (SCI) and Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI) have been used. All three citation databases have been
used, as citations received from journals outside the home discipline are just as relevant for this study as those from
within the home discipline. In the analysis we only included citations from journals covered by ISI.
The analyses below consist of different statistical analyses of the data material. Multivariate linear regression analysis
of the statistical relations between the dependent and the independent variables gives information on statistically
significant relations having controlled for otherwise hidden relations with other variables. Furthermore, we are given
the slope coefficients and a p-value for the linear relationship. Pearson’s R2 reveals information about the degree of
correlation between the dependent and the independent variables when controlling for the effects of the other variables.
The analyses have been made in Microsoft Excel and SPSS.
4. Results
Before scrutinising the linear regression analyses and interpreting the coefficients it must be emphasised that when
we interpret the coefficients we say: increasing a given independent variable by, e.g. 0.3 is interpreted as leading to an
increase in the dependent variable by 0.3 all other things equal. However, that is not to be understood deterministic. It
is only statistical tendencies in the dataset and not predictors for the future.
Table 2 is a transcript of the output of the linear regression. First of all we notice that the R-square is not very large
which means that this model is not an especially good fit. The R-square is 0.312 which means that we can explain
31 percent of the variation in the dataset. That is not impressive but the regression can still provide insight into the
self-citing rates. Please note that non-significant variables are not included in the table.
First of all we can see that some document types influence the self-citing rate negatively and others positively.
Journals containing many articles and notes will tend to get a higher self-citing rate. On the other hand, journals
consisting of many book reviews and reviews will tend to have a lower self-citing rate. This is an expected finding as
these document types (and all document types in general) contain references primarily to other document types than
those two types as shown by Moed and Van Leeuwen (1995).
Table 2
Multivariate linear regression analysis
Variable

Coefficients

t-Statistic

p-Value

Intercept
Geographic location journal
Share of publications not in English
Article
Review
Letter
Note
Editorial
Book review
Other
Trend
R-squared
Observations

0.03403
−0.00339
−0.00940
0.00008
−0.00114
–
0.00075
–
−0.00008
–
−0.00068
0.312
288

10.696
−1.683
−2.664
3.216
−1.818
–
4.813
–
−2.781
–
−1.767

<0.01
<0.1
<0.01
<0.01
<0.1
–
<0.01
–
<0.01
–
<0.1

Dependent variable is self-citing rate.

52

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

Fig. 1. Self-cited rate and the 3-year diachronous JIF.
Table 3
Multivariate linear regression analysis of JIF and independent variable is self-cited rate
JIF

R-square

Coefficient of dependent variable

p-Value of coefficient

Synchronous JIF exclusion letter
Synchronous JIF inclusion letter
Diachronous 3-year JIF
Diachronous 5-year JIF

0.187
0.188
0.196
0.210

−1.994
−1.974
−4.274
−10.774

<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

Furthermore, we can see in the table that the geographic location of the journal influences the self-citing rates
negatively. The coefficient of −0.00339 is interpreted as journals from outside North America having a self-citing
rate that is 0.00339 lower than other journals. The language variable also contributes. Journals not written in English
have lower self-citing rates as they have a self-citing rate that is 0.00940 lower than journals written in English. These
two variables affect the self-citing rate negatively and can perhaps be explained the same way as the importance
of composition of document types. There might be a tendency to citing these peripheral areas less than mainstream
research which also can be detected in the self-citing rates. Journals containing many of these documents will – just as
the rest of the scientific community – cite them less. But that is beyond the scope of these analyses to investigate.
A few remarks need to be made concerning self-cited rates as the relationship between JIF and self-cited rate may
not be described best as linear which is default when we employ a linear regression. Fig. 1 is an illustration of the
relationship between the 3-year diachronous JIF and self-cited rate. In the figure it is evident that the relationship
cannot be viewed as linear.
This is just an illustration of the relationship between the 3-year diachronous JIF and self-cited rate. To extend
the point to all different types of JIFs we define four different linear regression models. All with self-cited rate as
independent variable and JIF as dependent. A short summary is available in Table 3.
As we can see the relationship is statistically significant for all four JIFs and in all four cases the coefficient is negative.
Furthermore, it is clear that the R-square of all types of JIF is not very high. Therefore, we try to describe the relationship
non-linearly by employing the transformed self-cited rate. The results of the new regressions can be seen in Table 4.
First of all we note the much higher R-square which indicates that this is a much better fit. We also note that the
coefficients are no longer negative but that is due to the changing of the variable. In the further analysis we therefore
choose to describe the relationship between JIF and self-cited rate as non-linear by employing the transformed version
of the variable (Table 5).
Table 4
Multivariate linear regression analysis of JIF and independent variable is transformed self-cited rate
JIF

R-square

Coefficient of dependent variable

p-Value of coefficient

Synchronous JIF exclusion letter
Synchronous JIF inclusion letter
Diachronous 3-year JIF
Diachronous 5-year JIF

0.452
0.456
0.458
0.510

0.102
0.101
0.215
0.566

<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

53

Table 5
Multivariate linear regression analysis of 3-year diachronous JIF
Variable

Coefficients

t-Statistic

p-Value

Intercept
Geographic location of journal
Share of publications not in English
Self-citing rate
Self-cited rate (transformed)
Scientific content (share of total)
Document types included in ISI-JIF
Total number of documents
R-squared
Observations

0.438
−1.198
−0.816
19.910
0.187
−0.0179
−0.007
0.0171
0.626
288

1.530
−6.413
−2.439
3.727
15.305
−6.612
−3.107
8.472

0.127
<0.01
<0.05
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

Finally, we analyse the dataset using various forms of JIFs as the dependent variable as it could indicate which
variables explain the JIF statistically significant and to see if the picture depicted is the same for all JIF types analysed.
In order to preserve an overview over the analyses we start out by describing the differences between the four models
in order to be able to single one of the models out and describe it further. It will be time consuming and more or less
purposeless to describe all four models as we show now. To illustrate the close relatedness of the four models we have
constructed Fig. 2 in which we can see the rank of each journal according to JIF. As we have 32 journals times 9 time
periods in the dataset we end up with ranks from 1 to 288. The circles in the figure illustrate the correlation between
the two synchronous JIFs and as they are the two JIFs most similar in description they form an almost straight line.
The squares in the figure compare one of the synchronous JIFs with one of the diachronous JIFs and as we can see
it is not a straight line but they are closely related. The triangles in the figure illustrate the correlation between the
two diachronous JIFs and again we see a close relation. This intra-disciplinary ranking with little difference between
different JIFs is in accordance with results found by Garfield (1998), Moed, Van Leeuwen, and Reedijk (1999) and
Stegmann (1999).
As the four models are so closely related we choose to describe only one and in cases where the models differ we
describe the differences. So in the following 3-year diachronous JIF is the main focus point. First of all we start out

Fig. 2. Correlation between journal rankings of selected models.

54

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

by presenting the results of the linear regression model and in the following we concentrate on each element of the
model.
We start by describing the influence by the time periods as described in the model. The trend variable is not
statistically significant in the four models at the 0.1 level. That gives us an indication that we will not benefit from
including in it the model. In future research and maybe including further data it might prove to be statistically significant
but future research will have to cast light on that element. For the time being we can only conclude that the variable is
not significant and therefore JIF is not increasing or decreasing in general over the years.
We tried running the model including all the document types but the high number of variables included weakened
the model considerably and very few turned out to contribute to the understanding of JIF. Therefore, we only include the
document types in aggregated forms. First of all we can see that the total number of documents significantly contributes
to increasing the JIF. The coefficient of 0.0171 is to be understood like this: if a journal editor manages to increase
the total number of documents published in the journal each year by 10 we will see an increase in JIF by 0.171. This
finding is in accordance with Rousseau and Van Hooydonk (1996) who also found a positive correlation between the
number of published articles and the impact factor.
The distribution of the total number of documents on document types show us that decreasing the share of documents
containing the highest degree of scientific material will increase the JIF. The coefficient is −0.0179 and statistically
significant at the 0.01 level. This means that journals with a scientific content share of 0.1 greater than another journal
will have a JIF −0.00179 lower all other things equal. This aspect is further enlightened by the variable of document
types included in the ISI calculation of JIF as it is also significant at the 0.01 level and the coefficient is negative.
The coefficient of −0.007 means that if we increase the number included in the ISI calculation of JIF by 100 the JIF
decreases by 0.7. Both variables are significant which indicates that it is not only a matter of the actual numbers of
documents with scientific content it is also a matter of the share these documents comprise when we consider the total
number of documents.
We notice that the variable describing the geographic origin of the journal is statistically significant at the 0.01 level.
The coefficient of −1.198 should be interpreted as non-North American originated journals have JIFs that are 1.198
lower. Strong American dominance has been widely recognised as noted by, e.g. Van Dalen (1999) reporting that 44
percent of the Nobel Prize winners in economics are born outside the US, but all of these have begun their award winning
work in America. There is a large export of economics researchers from the rest of the world to the United States (and
Canada). Hodgson and Rothman (1999) examined the institutional background of editors and authors of 30 economic
journals and also found strong American dominance. Even though the dominance is recognised this does not make
the phenomenon any less interesting. Almost all economics journals describe themselves as being international and
accept manuscripts from all over the world. As manuscripts allegedly are judged purely on their academic quality such
a strong American dominance should not necessarily prevail. While North American and other journals in principle
publish the same types of articles, the analysis here clearly shows that there is a difference in the degree of which these
articles are cited, even when controlling for a number of factors. Such a result need to be taken into account when
rankings of journals are constructed for evaluation purposes since publication in European journals will affect citation
numbers downwards.
The other variable concerned with geographical relations is statistically significant and that is the variable describing
the share of documents not written in English. The variable is significant at the 0.05 level and a coefficient of −0.816
tells us that increasing the share of documents not written in English will decrease the JIF. Increasing the share by 0.1
(meaning that 10 percent more of the documents are not written in English) decreases the JIF by 0.0816. However, it
should be noted that according to Archambault, Vignola-Gagné, Côté, Larivière, and Gingras (2006) the SSCI selection
of journals favours English and the bias affects citation analysis.
The self-citing rate variable is statistically significant at the 0.01 level and the coefficient is positive. The coefficient
of 19.910 should be understood as follows: if the share of self-citations is increased by 0.1 which means that 10 percent
more of the references in the journal are to the journal itself, the JIF will increase by 1.991. The self-cited rate variable
is also significant at the 0.01 level. The coefficient is positive but that is due to the fact that we have transformed
the original variable. This means that a positive coefficient of the transformed self-cited rate is to be understood as a
negative coefficient of the self-cited rate.
As we are analysing journal self-citations as a means to a better understanding of the mechanism of JIF we will
put the positive correlation between JIF and self-citing rate into perspective. We also have to be aware of the self-cited
rate variable as this further complicates things. Inherent in the mathematical definitions there is a close relationship

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

55

between the two self-citation rates. Using the notation in Table 1 we can differentiate the self-citing rate with respect to
a and the self-cited rate with respect to a and we find that they will both increase if a (for self-citing rate) is increased
which means that an increase in the number of self-citations all other things equal will lead to increased self-citing
rates and self-cited rates.
Although inherent in the mathematical definition it is a paradox that an increase in the self-citing rate leads to an
increase in JIF but it also leads to an increasing self-cited rate which is related to a lower JIF. This implies that JIF cannot
easily by manipulated by increasing the number of self-citations in the journal. The findings can be seen as a defence
of JIF as an indicator of quality as this is how we would want the rewarding system to work. Journals acknowledged to
a large extent by other journals are exponents of high quality whereas journals primarily acknowledged by themselves
are not. Interpreting the results as this we can also support Lawani’s theory that self-citing rate is not an expression of
egoism whereas on the other hand the self-cited rate is an expression of egoism as we see little or no recognition from
other journals.
However, they could also be seen as an example of the center–periphery issues in scholarly communication. It has
been stated by Whitley (1991) that economics is dominated by a core of journals which maintain a particular view of
economics. The periphery is engaged in alternative perceptions of economics and is not allowed to gain a foothold
by the self-reinforcing hierarchy. Interpreting the results using this perspective we see a number of journals with low
JIFs and high self-cited rates which we can determine as being the periphery in the set of economics journals in this
analysis. They are perhaps not focused on main stream research topics and/or using a heterodox theoretical approach.
The potential number of citing and cited journals is low and thus the journal is more or less isolated in the periphery of
economics. On the other hand, we find a number of journals with high JIFs and low self-cited rates. They are focused
on mainstream topics and/or using widely accepted theoretical approaches. Their potential number of citing and cited
journals is high and thus they are a part of the dominant core maintaining the hierarchy.
How the results should be interpreted is beyond the scope of this analysis as it would require an in-depth analysis
based on more qualitative investigations into structure of economics.
5. Conclusion
In this paper JIF-mechanism is investigated by focusing on journal self-citations as the treatment of these in analyses
and evaluations is highly disputed. First of all we have to stress that this paper only a relatively small number of journals
from only one social science. Furthermore, a number of variables are selected to be included in the study but adding
more or others could potentially modify the picture depicted here.
Bearing in mind that we cannot generalise the results we can conclude that increasing the self-citing rate increases
JIF. The self-citing rate is to some extent determined by the profile of the journal and has to do with the composition
of document types, geographical location, language and a development over time. Furthermore, we can conclude that
due to the mathematical definitions the self-citing rate and the self-cited rate are positively related. Finally, we can
conclude that the transformed self-cited rate is positively correlated with JIF which is to be interpreted as an increase
in the self-cited rate is related to a decrease in JIF.
Applying one perspective of analysis we can see this as a defence of JIF as is provides support to the hypothesis
that JIF is capturing the impact and quality of journals. Journals acknowledged to a large extent by other journals are
exponents of high quality whereas journals primarily acknowledged by themselves are not. This also gives support
to Lawani’s theory that self-citing rate is not an expression of egoism whereas on the other hand the self-cited rate
is an expression of egoism as we see little or no recognition from other journals. However, there are other models of
interpretation of the data. An alternative is to see this as a contribution to the center–periphery discussion in scholarly
communication as it could be describing the characteristics of the highly cited core within economics and the low cited
and isolated periphery.
Although many of the findings are as we expected we hereby provide the statistical analyses to support the hypotheses.
Hopefully, this can qualify the debate on JIFs and journal self-citations.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank Ronald Rousseau for his tremendous help. The author also thanks Birger Larsen and
Birger Hjørland for valuable comments and suggestions.

56

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

Appendix A. Journals included in this study

No.

Journal name

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

American Economic Review
American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies
Cambridge Journal of Economics
Desarollo Economico—Revista de Ciencas Sociales
Developing Economies
Eastern European Economics
Econometrica
Economic History Review
Economic Journal
Economica
Economics Letters
Ekonomiska Samfundets Tidskrift
European Economic Review
Explorations in Economic History
International Economic Review
Jahrbücher Für Nationalökonomie und Statistik
Journal of Econometrics
Journal of Economic Issues
Journal of Economic Literature
Journal of Economic Theory
Journal of political Economy
Kyklos
Oxford Economic Papers
RAND Journal of Economics
Review of Economic Studies
Review of Economics and Statistics
Scandinavian Journal of Economics
South African Journal of Economics
World Development
World Economy

Appendix B. Overview of variables

Variable

Values

Synchronous JIF exclusion letter

The number of citations to a journal in a given year to the publications in that journal
in the previous 2 years divided by the number of articles, reviews and notes.
The number of citations to a journal in a given year to the publications in that journal
in the previous 2 years divided by the number of articles, reviews, letters and notes.
The number of citations to the publications from 1 year in a journal given in 3 years
divided by the number of articles, reviews, letters and notes.
The number of citations to the publications from 1 year in a journal given in 5 years
divided by the number of articles, reviews, letters and notes.
1 = 1986; 2 = 1988; 3 = 1990; 4 = 1992; 5 = 1994; 6 = 1996; 7 = 1998; 8 = 2000;
9 = 2002.
The total number of references to a journal by itself in a given year divided by the
number total number of references in the journal that year.
The total number of citations to a journal in a given year given by the journal itself
divided by the total number of citations to the journal in that year. Both numerator
and denominator are corrected when computed.
1 divided by self-cited rate.
The number of articles published by a journal in a given year.

Synchronous JIF inclusion letter
Diachronous JIF 3-years
Diachronous JIF 5-years
Time period
Self-citing rate
Self-cited rate

Transformed self-cited rate
Article

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58
Review
Letter
Note
Book review
Editorial
Others
Total
Share of document types with scientific content
Number of publications included in the ISI calculation of JIF
Geographic location of journal
Number of non-English language publications
Share of non-English language publications

57

The number of reviews published by a journal in a given year.
The number of letters published by a journal in a given year.
The number of notes published by a journal in a given year.
The number of book reviews published by a journal in a given year.
The number of editorials published by a journal in a given year.
The number of other document types published by a journal in a given year.
The total number of publications published by a journal in a given year.
Number of reviews, notes, letters and articles divided by the total number of
documents.
Number of reviews, notes and articles.
0 = North America; 1 = other countries.
The number of publications written in a non-English language in a given year in a
journal.
The number of documents written in a non-English language divided with the total
number of publications.

References
Aksnes, D. W. (2003). A macro study of self-citations. Scientometrics, 56(2), 235–246.
Archambault, É., Vignola-Gagné, É., Côté, G., Larivière, V., & Gingras, Y. (2006). Benchmarking scientific output in the social sciences and
humanities: The limits of existing databases. Scientometrics, 68(3), 329–342.
Christensen, F. H., Ingwersen, P., & Wormell, I. (1997). Online determination of the journal impact factor and its international properties. Scientometrics, 40(3), 529–540.
Dorban, M., & Vandevenne, A. F. (1991). Bibliometric analysis of bibliographic behaviours in economic sciences. Scientometrics, 25(1), 149–165.
Egghe, L., & Rousseau, R. (1990). Introduction to informetrics. Quantitative methods in library, documentation and information science. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science Publishers.
Eto, H. (2003). Interdisciplinary information input and output of a nano-technology project. Scientometrics, 58(1), 5–33.
Fassoulaki, A., Paraskeva, A., Papilas, K., & Karabinis, G. (2000). Self-citations in six anaesthesia journals and their significance in determining
the impact factor. British Journal of Anaesthesia, 84(2), 266–269.
Frandsen, T. F., & Rousseau, R. (2005). Article impact calculated over arbitrary periods. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 56(1), 58–62.
Frandsen, T. F. (2005). Journal interaction: A bibliometric analysis of economics journals. Journal of Documentation, 61(3).
Gami, A. S., Montori, V. M., Wilczynski, N. L., & Haynes, R. B. (2004). Author self-citation in the diabetes literature. Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 170(13), 1925–1927.
Garfield, E. (1974). Journal citation studies. XVII. Journal Self-Citation Rates—There’s a Difference, Current Contents, 52(December), 1974.
Garfield, E. (1998). Long-term vs. short-term journal impacts: Does it matter? The Scientist, 12(3), 10–12.
Glänzel, W., & Moed, H. F. (2002). Journal impact measures in bibliometric research. Scientometrics, 53, 171–193.
Hodgson, G., & Rothman, H. (1999). The editors and authors of economics journals: A case of institutional oligopoly? The Economics Journal,
109, 165–186.
Hyland, K. (2003). Self-citation and self-reference: Credibility and promotion in academic publication. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 54, 251–259.
Jennings, C. (2001). Citation data: The wrong impact? Cortex Forum, 37(4), 585–589.
Kalaitzidakis, P., Mamuneas, T. P., & Stengos, T. (2003). Rankings of academic journals and institutions in economics. Journal of the European
Economic Association, 1(6), 1346–1366.
Kaltenborn, K. F., & Kuhn, K. (2004). The journal impact factor as a parameter for the evaluation of researchers and research. Revista Espanola de
Enfermedades Digestivas, 96(7), 460–476.
Lawani, S. M. (1982). On the heterogeneity and classification of author self-citations. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 33,
281–284.
Miller, J. B. (2002). Impact factors and publishing research. Scientist, 16, 11.
Moed, H. F. (2000). Bibliometric indicators reflect publication and management strategies. Scientometrics, 47(2), 323–346.
Moed, H. F., & Van Leeuwen, T. N. (1995). Improving the accuracy of Institute for Scientific Information’s journal impact factors. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 46(6), 461–467.
Moed, H. F., Van Leeuwen, T. N., & Reedijk, J. (1999). Towards appropriate indicators of journal impact. Scientometrics, 46, 575–589.
Neuberger, J., & Counsell, C. (2002). Impact factors: Uses and abuses. European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 14(3), 209–211.
Peritz, B. C., & Bar-Ilan, J. (2002). The sources used by bibliometrics–scientometrics as reflected in references. Scientometrics, 54(2), 269–284.
Pichappan, P. (1995). A dual refinement of journal self-citation measures. Scientometrics, 33(1), 13–21.
Rousseau, R. (1999). Temporal differences in self-citation rates of scientific journals. Scientometrics, 44(3), 521–531.
Rousseau, R., & Small, H. (2005). Escher staircases dwarfed. ISSI Newsletter, 1(4), 8–10.
Rousseau, R., & Van Hooydonk, G. (1996). Journal production and journal impact factors. Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
47(10), 775–780.

58

T.F. Frandsen / Journal of Informetrics 1 (2007) 47–58

Sevinc, A. (2004). Manipulating impact factor. An unethical issue or an editor’s choice? Swiss Medical Weekly, 134, 410.
Smart, J. C., & Elton, C. F. (1982). Consumption factor scores of psychology journals: Scientometric proporties and qualitative implications.
Scientometrics, 4(5), 349–360.
Snyder, H., & Bonzi, S. (1998). Patterns of self-citation across disciplines (1980–1989). Journal of Documentation, 55(5), 431–435.
Stegmann, J. (1999). Building a list of journals with constructed impact factors. Journal of Documentation, 55(3), 310–324.
Tsay, M.-Y. (2006). Journal self-citation study for semiconductor literature: Synchronous and diachronous approach. Information Processing and
Management, 42(6), 1567–1577.
Van Dalen, H. (1999). The golden age of nobel economists. The American Economist, 43(2), s.19–s.35.
Van Raan, A. F. J. (1998a). In matters of quantitative studies of science the fault of theorists is offering too little and asking too much. Scientometrics,
43(1), 129–139.
Van Raan, A. F. J. (1998b). The impact of international collaboration on the impact of research results. Scientometrics, 42(3), 423–428.
White, H. (2001). Authors as citers over time. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 52(2), 87–108.
Whitley, R. (1991). The organisation and role of journals in economics and other scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Working Paper 204. Manchester business School.

