Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

A case study of an EMR system at a large hospital in India: Challenges and strategies
for successful adoption
Jeremiah Scholl a,⇑, Shabbir Syed-Abdul b,c, Luai Awad Ahmed d
a

Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North Norway and Health Informatics Centre, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
College of Medical Sciences and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
c
National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan
d
Department of Health and Care Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, Norway
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 21 January 2010
Accepted 8 July 2011
Available online 9 August 2011
Keywords:
Developing countries
Electronic Medical Records
CSCW
Participatory design
ICT4D
Ethnography
India

a b s t r a c t
This paper presents an ethnographically inspired interpretive case study of the Electronic Medical Record
(EMR) system at Sankara Nethralaya hospital in India. It presents challenges related to the adoption of the
system and methods and strategies that were utilized in order to overcome these challenges and help the
system be adopted successfully. One of the more notable challenges at the hospital was a user base that
included skeptical users, those lacking computing skills, and that had a history of rejecting designs.
Despite these barriers the hospital was able to adopt the EMR system successfully. Notable issues related
to the success of the system include the design strategy that was eventually used, and critical technical
and social features of the system intended to support skeptical users and those lacking IT skills. The study
contributes to overall understanding of the environment at large hospitals in developing countries as it
relates to the adoption of EMR systems, and helps inform on methods that can be used to improve the
adoption of EMR systems in similar contexts in both developed and developing countries.
Ó 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) are expected to provide a
wide range of advantages to healthcare providers [1–3]. The health
sector is still far behind many other areas of society in the adoption
of Information Technology (IT) however [4]. EMR systems are no
exception in this regard and are challenging to adopt in practice.
A contributing factor is that healthcare organizations are complex and include a variety of complicated work practices [5,6]. This
includes strong interdependency on roles, and a hierarchy of distributed responsibilities. This interdependence can make imposing
changes difﬁcult because a small change in one person’s workﬂow
may affect the performance of someone else’s workﬂow [7]. Medical Informatics Systems (MIS) for such hospitals can thus be challenging to design and implement, and nearly half of them fail due
to user and staff resistance [8].
Studies employing methods adopted from Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW) have been suggested in order to improve socio-technical understanding related to this complexity,
and ultimately lead to better designed MIS systems [9]. Knowledge

⇑ Corresponding author. Address: Karolinska Institutet, Department of Learning,
Informatics, Management and Ethics (LIME), SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. Fax:
+46 852483600.
E-mail address: jeremiah.scholl@ki.se (J. Scholl).
1532-0464/$ - see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.07.008

obtained from organizations that have already adopted MIS systems is also viewed as particularly valuable as input [10].
There is a general lack of studies however that report on EMR
systems that have been successfully implemented at large hospitals in developing countries. Most relevant studies on EMR systems
that have been published are from developed countries [11–15].
ICT solutions for developing countries often require a different approach than is used in developed countries however [1,16]. Organizational and user needs can be different due to cultural factors, and
issues such as a lack of computing skills among staff may complicate adoption. A few notable studies have been conducted on EMR
systems for developing countries [1]. None of the systems however
have been implemented at a large hospital.
Another challenge is that there is a lack of available studies that
report on design strategies for EMR systems in general. Although
usability has been acknowledged as a critical aspect of overall system design [11], existing studies of EMR systems have focused
much more on the implementation process [11,17] than on the design process.
This lack of studies complicates efforts for those attempting to
design EMR systems in developing countries. Participatory Design
(PD) for example is a technique commonly used in designing MIS
systems and is based on utilizing two-way dialog between designers and users during the design process. Depending on how it is
conducted it can give users a high level of control over the ﬁnal
product that is implemented.

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

Few studies that report details on the usage of PD during the
development of EMR systems have been reported however. A study
of an EMR system at an acute stroke unit in a Danish hospital being
a notable exception [18]. It is unclear however how this study reﬂects on what can be expected when attempting to utilize PD in
developing countries. This is because PD is considered to be a
framework instead of a speciﬁc protocol. Adaptations must be
made to each unique situation, and studies reported experiences
from one workplace culture, such as a Scandinavian workplace
including labor unions, can be difﬁcult to transfer into another
workplace culture [19].
These issues illustrate the many unclear challenges related to
the adoption of EMR systems at large hospitals in developing countries. Complexities that may be encountered related to the organizational environment and user needs are unknown, and methods
and strategies that have been used to overcome these challenges
and meet these needs have not been reported.
This paper addresses this issue. An interpretive case study from
a large eye hospital in India that has adopted an EMR system is presented. Some of the key challenges the hospital faced in trying to
adopt the system include a fairly complicated organizational climate that included a wide range of expectations from the system
from various stakeholders, and difﬁculty in identifying the correct
design strategy. This resulted in users rejecting the ﬁrst few versions of the system. In order to overcome these challenges an
extensive (and novel) version of PD was utilized. This process, together with the inclusion of several notable technical and social
system features targeting skeptical users and users lacking computing skills, eventually helped the hospital overcome these challenges and adopt the system successfully.
Together the issues presented contribute to overall understanding of challenges that may be encountered when adopting EMR
systems at large hospitals in developing countries, and methods
and strategies that can be used to overcome these challenges in
similar contexts, (i.e. large hospitals including skeptical users
and/or those lacking IT skills) in both developed and developing
countries.

2. Background
The successful adoption of MIS systems at complex organizations requires an alignment between the system functionality
and the needs and working patterns of the target organization
[20]. This often requires a socio-technical approach [21,22,9] and
system design that is adapted speciﬁcally to the organization
[23]. This customization not only includes technical aspects of
the system but also social features in the form of organizational
changes [22]. These features need to support each other, and need
to be developed iteratively.
There are a number of factors that make such custom built EMR
systems difﬁcult to adopt. An issue well established in CSCW theory is that varying expectations from various users can lead to systems that create a disparity between those who beneﬁt from the
system, and those who do additional work to support it [23]. This
can lead to system failure.
This issue also is reﬂected in studies of EMR systems. Managers
tend to view EMR systems as facilitators of organizational change
for example, whereas clinicians view them more as facilitators of
the documentation process [12]. These different views can cause
problems in trying to realize the original goals for adopting the system [12].
Suggestions have been made in order to deal with this issue by
making sure that the impacts of the system are considered in the
context of different stakeholder groups [2]. While this may seem
intuitive it is an issue that is sometimes overlooked. The additional

959

work incurred by those that input data in the clinical context in order to support non-clinical beneﬁts for example, may not always
be considered when adopting them [24,25].
Studies from developing countries have also noted a wide variety of both clinical and non clinical reasons for adopting different
EMR systems. These reasons are not identical for each system that
has been implemented and include issues such as research, clinical
use, and easier reporting of aggregate statistics [1]. A picture of the
overall expectations and interests that can affect the adoption of
EMR systems at large hospitals in a developing country, and ways
to help meet these expectations, could thus be of value, as it is unclear as to how complex of an environment can be expected and
how to approach the adoption of system for this unknown
complexity.
There are also a variety of other issues related to the adoption of
EMR systems that may present challenges in developing countries.
Some concrete attempts have been made to generalize issues that
may cause a speciﬁc implementation to fail or succeed based on
the available case studies [15]. This noted ‘‘Previous computer or
EMR experience’’ by staff was noted as a critical issue for successful
EMR implementation [15]. Health staff in developing countries
however will often have less experience using computers than
those in the developed world. Methods that can be used to overcome this problem could thus be of value to help the adoption of
EMR systems in developing countries.
As noted in the introduction, another issue is that design strategies have not been well reported for EMR systems in general. A related issue, is that PD as it is often practiced within healthcare has
been noted as too reliant on external designers [36]. This can make
it difﬁcult to meet evolving needs of organizations since external
designers generally do not provide enough design resources over
time.
This issue seems particularly relevant for the successful adoption of systems in developing countries since the creation of systems that are operationally sustainable, and thus do not rely on
outsiders for support beyond the start up phase, is noted as a
highly relevant problem [26]. With respect to EMR systems a key
challenge with this perspective is thus how to approach the task
of helping the hospital become experienced enough to succeed at
such ‘self-centered design’ processes after any external design
team has left.

3. Method
An ethnographically inspired interpretive case study was conducted at Sankara Nethralaya (SN) eye hospital in the Indian
metropolitan city, Chennai, in the state of Tamil Nadu. The study
was conducted in order to investigate a hospital in a developing
country where an EMR system had been adopted. It was conducted
by an Indian medical doctor with the intent of informing the Indian
medical community on issues that may aid in the adoption of EMR
systems in similar settings. Some of the speciﬁc topics of interest
before the study was conducted were the expectations for the system from various actors in the hospital, challenges the hospital
faced during its adoption, and strategies that the hospital used to
overcome these challenges.
SN was selected for the study because it is a large hospital with
a strong reputation, and because they were in the process of implementing the EMR system when contacted about the study, and
thus was still using paper and electronic records. This provided
the opportunity to allow knowledge about the EMR system, and
also about the ongoing implementation process, and issues related
to the transition between the two systems, to be obtained.
Data was collected during a 53 day period from 12th Nov 2007
to 4th Jan 2008. The data was collected using observations,

960

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

semi-structured interviews, informal conversations and documents. These documents included the hospital’s web site and paper and electronic versions of the health records used at the
hospital. Some additional follow up information was also obtained
by email correspondence with contacts at the hospital after the formal data collection period was ﬁnished.
3.1. Observations
Observations yield best results when conducted by an outsider
with considerable inside experience [27]. For this study the observer (the second author) was a medical doctor with 5 years previous
experience working in a hospital (not the hospital where observations took place) as a physician. The observations were conducted
in 3 phases for a total of 80 h. Short observational periods of this
type can be extremely useful in a design context when conducted
appropriately [27].
General observations of the operation and work situation at the
hospital were conducted in addition to observations focusing on
speciﬁc work roles and locations that were deemed to be interesting during previous observations.
The ﬁrst phase of observations was conducted to help the observer get an overall idea of the organization and structure of the hospital. During the ﬁrst week in the hospital the observer became
acquainted with the different departments and also gained general
information about how patient records are created, and who enters
information into the EMR and paper records. Observations were
also made at the reception desk in order to gain general information about the reception area. The observer took general notes
about the hospital and also took photographs to use for later
reference.
This was followed by 2 additional phases of observations that
followed the steps that a patient goes through at the hospital. This
included cabins where patients meet with optometrist and where
they receive consultation from an ophthalmologist (referred to as
consultant for the rest of the paper).
During the ﬁrst phase of observations it was revealed that 60 to
70% of patients’ information entered into medical records is done
so by optometrists. The bulk of observations focusing on speciﬁc
a work role thus targeted the optometrists’ routine work.
During the second phase approximately 30 h of observations
were conducted with twelve different optometrists. Permission
was granted by the head of department to conduct observations inside the optometrists‘ cabin. This required the observer to create
social contact with the optometrists. This social contact was obtained by having the Head Optometrist introduce the observer to
the optometrists.
Attempts were made to have minimal inﬂuence on the work
practice of the optometrists during observation. The optometrists
were told that the observer had arrived from Norway in order to
observe how eye hospitals in India function. The optometrists were
not told about the speciﬁc purpose of the observations in order to
avoid inﬂuencing the way they used the EMR system. They were
also not told that the observer was a medical doctor, as there were
concerns that this may have inﬂuenced their work due to the strict
hierarchy in the hospital between doctors and optometrists.
The optometrists were engaged in discussions about general issues such as workload, and later also asked questions related to the
EMR system, such as why they have a computer in their cabin.
Notes were collected regarding interesting observations and comments by the optometrists, and other issues that made an impression [28].
The third phase focused on observations with consultants. 10 h
of observations were conducted with ﬁve different consultants.
The medical background of the observer helped him to mingle with
them easily. In the beginning there were some reservations since

the consultants were unsure exactly what the observer was seeking information about. Once they understood however that the
observations were related to use of the EMR system, and not their
competence of treating patients, they were open and interested to
discuss issues related to the EMR system. Many of the consultants
became so interested in the study that they often tracked the observer down to share information when the observer was in another cabin.

3.2. Semi-structured interviews
Thirty semi-structured interviews were conducted in English
with 21 different actors, including hospital managers, IT staff,
health staff and an employee of the vendor (a former-employee
of the hospital) of the EMR system who is the project leader for
developing the EMR software. Interviews lasted from 20 to
60 min, for an average of 40 min per interview. Approximately
21 h of interviews were conducted in total. The details of the interviews are contained in (Table 1).
Thirty interviews were conducted with 21 different actors.
Some participants were interviewed two or three times in order
to clarify information deemed to be interesting during their initial
interview. All interviews were recorded except one interview with
a consultant that requested his/her interview not to be recorded.
The interviews were conducted face-to-face by the same person
that conducted the observations. The interviews began with the
interviewer introducing himself and elucidating the purpose of
study. Conﬁdentiality and privacy of the participant was ensured.
After consent was given an appointment for conducting the interview was made for a time convenient to the participant. Apart from
semi-structured interviews informal talks/conversations especially
at lunchtime or tea break also occurred. Such informal talks proved
quite informative because participants seemed relaxed and more
open.
All the interviews were transcribed by a professional transcriptionist and were veriﬁed by cross checking. Eighty-three pages of
transcribed material were produced from recorded interviews.
Transcribed material was read thoroughly back and forth.
Initial analysis of the interview data was conducted by the person that had conducted the observations and interviews. The goal
of this analysis was highly related to the original goals of the study.
Attention was given to identifying issues that had promoted or
hindered the adoption of the system, and the strategies utilized
by the hospital to help it be adopted successfully. Factors favoring
or hindering the adoption of the EMR system were highlighted and
common topics or concerns expressed by the participants were given priority.
The results of this analysis were then discussed with an HCI/
CSCW researcher (the ﬁrst author) and this person reviewed the results of the analysis independently. The two researchers engaged
in continuing discussions and developed common themes that
were used to conduct further analysis. These themes were selected
Table 1
The interviews conducted during the study.
Actors

No.

No. of interviews

Managers
Chairman
Medical Superintendent
Medical Record Department
Hospital IT Director
Head Optometrist
Consultants
Optometrist
Vendor

5
1
1
1
1
1
5
10
1

11
1
2
3
2
3
7
10
2

Total

21

30

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

to help develop connections between issues identiﬁed during the
ﬁrst round of analysis, and thus build a better overall picture of
the situation at the hospital as it related to the adoption of the
EMR system. The themes selected were the organizational environment (including interests and expectations for the system), design
history and strategy, and critical technical system features and critical
social system features that helped the system be successfully
adopted.
These themes were also deemed as useful in order to incorporate a CSCW-oriented perspective into the analysis, where understanding of organizational issues, use of the appropriate design
approach, and eventual inclusion of the correct system features,
are viewed as crucial for creating a system that can be successfully
adopted in practice [29]. In this respect the themes are highly related to understanding issues that affect the adoption of systems,
and methods and strategies that can be used to improve their
adoption, before, during and after implementation of the system.
Some limitations related to the quality of the data were encountered with respect to details of the design method. This was because the study took place after most of the design process had
been conducted and because the person that conceived the study
and collected the data did not have a design background, and thus
did not inquire deeply into these details. The data that did exist
was still deemed to have value however, as it provided some details on how the design strategy aided the successful adoption of
the system. An additional limitation in analyzing the data was
encountered due to partial data loss that occurred after the analysis presented below had been conducted. It was thus not possible
to further reﬁne the data analysis in order to create useful tables
to, for example, further summarize the ﬁndings and/or ﬂesh out
some of the more interesting issues that had been identiﬁed.
Notes from the observation data were not formally merged with
the interviews during this analysis process. Instead the observations
helped to guide the interview process by allowing them to be conducted after the interviewer had developed understanding about
the overall hospital environment as it related to the EMR system.
4. Results
This section is organized around the four themes, organizational
environment, design history and strategy, critical technical system
features and critical social system features. The organizational
environment subsection informs on the general environment at
the hospital in order to ground the overall study in the understanding of this environment. It also provides insight into some of the
key challenges that the environment presented with respect to
the EMR system, including varying expectations for the system
from different actors and a challenging user base. The design history and strategy subsection is related to both the challenges the
hospital faced in adopting the system, and in strategies that helped
overcome these challenges. This is because identifying the correct
design strategy proved to be a great challenge for the hospital, and
the eventual utilization of the correct design strategy was a key to
success. Finally, the critical system features subsection describes
speciﬁc aspects of the EMR system that helped meet the needs of
users identiﬁed in the earlier subsections. This includes both social
and technical aspects of the system.

961

own wards where they admit patients treat them and discharge
them. In addition to treating patients at this main facility (the location where the study took place) SN treats patients at 5 satellite clinics in the Chennai area, and at a hospital in Calcutta.
The organization of SN is very hierarchical and managers hold a
considerable amount of power. There are no labor unions, or formalized mechanisms to ensure job satisfaction or security for
workers beyond keeping their superiors satisﬁed with their work
production. Clinical staff are generally focused on day-to-day work
and do not generally engage in discussions around strategic ways
to improve the hospital or their work environment.
Because SN is located in an Indian metropolitan city it is a fairly
crowded place. (Fig. 1) shows a picture of a crowded waiting room
at SN full of patients waiting to see a consultant.
4.1.1. Challenging users
One of the key social issues that made adopting the system a
challenge was that many of the staff were reluctant to change, and
in some cases had little or no previous experience using computers.
Two of the 10 optometrists interviewed noted that they did not
have any computer experience before the system was implemented. One of the managers explained,
‘‘We have mixed generations of staff; it is easier with younger
and newly employed staff, it was not easy to convince senior
consultant to train and make them to use system. They are used
to paper based practice since last 20 to 30 years. . .’’ (Manager_4
Dec. 2007)

4.1.2. Interests and expectations for the system
In addition to needing to accommodate users that did not have
previous computing experience another signiﬁcant challenge within the organizational environment was that the EMR system was expected to have a fairly large impact over a wide range of activities
across the organization. Actors with a variety of work roles had an
interest in the system, and these actors conducted various activities at the hospital. These interests were often expressed in relation
to their primary work activities [30] although secondary activities
were also mentioned. The Hospital Chairman for example originally proposed the idea of adopting an EMR system in 2000. He
is strategically interested in the hospital becoming a Hi-Tech Eye
Research Centre and is conﬁdent that a medical information
data-base related to the EMR system will be the best option to
store, retrieve and analyze medical information for research
purposes. He stated this by explaining,

4.1. Organizational environment
SN is a large tertiary hospital specializing in ophthalmology. Each
day it serves approximately 1200 patients and performs 100 surgeries. The main hospital contains 17 departments and sub-specialties.
Patients are received directly at outpatient clinics and also on
referral from other hospitals. Each of the sub-specialties has their

Fig. 1. A photograph taken in a waiting room at SN. Urban areas of India tend to be
crowded with people and the waiting room is no exception.

962

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

‘‘We want to use the information and communication technology advances to the best advantage in this institution. EMR system will be very helpful to us for doing research either
prospective or retrospective studies.’’ (Manager_1 Dec. 2007)
The Medical Superintendant of the hospital also has a wide
range of non clinical responsibilities and expressed interest in
the system for quite a wide range of reasons. These interests included improved transparency and workﬂow, reducing waiting
time for manual transport of paper records, and administrative
support such as helping him ﬁnd out how many surgeries have
been performed each day, and how many patients were seen by
each member of the health staff. He also expressed an interest in
using the system to support the clinical staff in new ways, such
as by including Decision Support Systems and helping practice Evidence Based Medicine. He explained,
‘‘At present doctors may go by approximation or sometimes ask
for help with colleagues for calculating dosage of the drug, all
these calculations we would like to put in EMR.’’ (Manager_2
Nov. 2007)
As expected the head of Medical Record Department (MRD) was
enthusiastic the EMR system could help make his department
more efﬁcient. (Fig. 2) shows a picture taken of the paper archive
room and illustrates the large number of paper records the department currently has to manage. He explained,
‘‘Each year approximately 300,000 records are added to the
archive, constantly we had to increase space for storing these
records, but with creating electronic data-base, spatial and temporal problems is solved forever.’’ (Manager_3 Dec. 2007)
In addition the MRD manager was also enthusiastic about using
the system to support Telemedicine. This is because his department needs to handle information sent to and from archives outside the hospital, and from clinics in the surrounding area. He
explained that,

Fig. 3. A motor bike used for transporting paper records.

‘‘In Chennai itself we have 5 clinics in different locations. The
major problem is to transfer requested records from one location to another. Either manually or by transfer faxed copy or
we have to scan and send in attached record and it takes lot
of time and resources. With this EMR system record transfer
is made easy and record loss is avoided.’’ (Manager_3 Dec. 2007)
Today this transport of paper records from the hospital to clinics, and to and from the archives, is currently accomplished by
using metal boxes that are ﬁt on the back of a motor bike. Fig. 3
shows a picture of one of these motor bikes.
Not surprisingly the primary interest the clinical staff expressed
for the EMR system was support for their clinical work. One
optometrist for example commented about an interest in using
the EMR system in order to view all past history for patients more
easily than with paper records. He explained that with the current
system this can be fairly difﬁcult, as sometimes locating paper records can be a challenge. He explained,
‘‘Sometimes patients visit without prior appointments even
after few years of their last visit, then it takes 1 or 2 h to ﬁnd
that record. However with the EMR system this waiting time
is saved, doesn’t matter after how much period a patient is visiting.’’(Optometrist_1 Nov. 2007)
The consultants expressed an interest in the EMR system for a
variety of reasons including being able to access patient medical
information with just few clicks of a mouse. Some surgeons also
mentioned an interest in accessing medical records from home in
order to plan surgeries and see examination reports.
In addition to clinical beneﬁts the consultants were also positive about non-clinical aspects of the system, such as its ability
to support research. One of the consultants mentioned for
example,
‘‘I am interested because this EMR system is very good tool for
accessing patients information in daily practice as well as the
data stored will be a good resource to carry research.’’ (Consultant_5 Dec. 2007)

4.2. Design history and strategy

Fig. 2. The archive room at SN.

Identifying the correct design method in this complex environment was a difﬁcult task both for the hospital and later for an outside vendor that was hired to develop the system. At the time the
study was conducted the iterative design and implementation of

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

the EMR system was still ongoing and had taken place over an
8 year period.
The initial plan for designing the system was to have the hospital
IT staff develop the system without being given a concrete set of
requirements and speciﬁcations. The end result was rejected by
the health staff for various reasons. These included issues such as
the user interface not containing all the required ﬁelds for data input.
It also required a large amount of time for data entry due to a poorly
designed user interface, and lead to disturbances in work ﬂow.
When this system was rejected the Hospital Chairman arranged
a meeting with the IT staff, Head of the MRD, and clinical staff in
order to identify a more effective design process. A decision was
made to send select members from each department to visit the
UK and USA to survey hospitals that have adopted EMR systems
so that they may learn from existing practice. The selected individuals observed the systems in use, enquired about how the systems
were designed and implemented, and returned to SN with new
ideas and strategies.
\A decision was then made to hire a private vendor to design the
EMR system. The vendor is well known in the area and has been involved in developing EMR systems for the National Health Services
in the UK. The vendor proceeded by using a design process that
incorporated input from the Head Optometrist, the Medical Superintendent of the hospital and the Head of the MRD. Within a few
months the vendor developed an EMR system based on these speciﬁcations with a user interface that ‘‘looked good on screen’’ (Manager_3 Dec. 2007). Attempts were made to implement this system
into practice. Once again however the health staff rejected the design. The primary complaint was that the user interface was too
inefﬁcient. One of the managers at the hospital explained it like this,
‘‘At ﬁrst the vendor created something that looked good on
screen, but actually it was useless to doctors. If something
needs 100 clicks before it can be ﬁlled in it is useless. Doctors’
want fast and easy system.’’ (Manager_3 Dec. 2007)
This failure made the vendor fairly discouraged and unsure if
any system they developed at SN would be accepted by the health
staff. They decided that if they were going to go forward that they
would need to use an extensive version of PD that more directly involved a variety of staff from the hospital. Rather than just
attempting to get clinical staff to provide input to an external design team, they requested for a consultant to step forward and
actually lead the design team. A senior consultant, serving as a
department head, (hereafter referred as Consultant_1) volunteered
to assist in this regard. Consultant_1 noted that this was a fairly
challenging process and explained that,
‘‘The main challenge in the development of the EMR was
designing a user friendly screen for the data entry in the form
of predetermined templates and to provide options to modify
data if required.’’ (Consultant_1 Nov. 2007).
Consultant_1 was not only involved in system design but also
served as the ‘‘physician champion’’ of the system during the
implementation process [14], [15]. In addition to Consultant_1
the vendor also hired a few senior members of the IT staff onto
the development team. They had each worked at SN for 10 to
15 years and thus had a large knowledge base of the workﬂow
and organizational issues at the hospital. They also had a strong
relationship with members of the health staff and thus could help
identify what problems they might face with the system, and also
help identify what functionality they require. One of the former
members of the IT staff for example was instructed to conduct
observations in the ofﬁces of a few consultants and engage them
in discussions about possible ways to assist their work with Information Systems.

963

Another aspect of the approach is that at some point some of
the members of the IT staff hired by the vendor are expected to return to hospital as full time employees. During this period they
will, among other things, continue to work on the EMR system
by providing technical assistance, iterative improvements and help
with upgrading the system. One of them explained his current situation like this,
‘‘I am working here from last 15 years, I am aware of workﬂow
and many people from health staff are my good friends. (Consultant_1)’s contribution is enormous; he designs interfaces
and explain how he wants the system to perform, and we make
software based on his requirements. Though my employer has
changed still I am working for this hospital.’’ (Vendor Dec. 2007)
Consultant_1 was given a space in the development lab and initially worked 100% leading the user-interface design team for
approximately 3 months until initial versions of all the user-interface modules had been completed. Afterwards Consultant_1 returned to treating patients during mornings, and has continued
to work with the system during afternoons as needed. Input from
other users was primarily gained from by Consultant_1 as needed
based on his contacts in the hospital, and from people that volunteered to provide input on speciﬁc issues. Consultant_1 opportunistically arranged meetings with others outside the
development lab in order to gain input from them without disrupting their time schedule. From time to time users would also arrange meetings with Consultant_1 and visit him in the
development lab in order to provide input on issues they wanted
addressed.
The design strategy ultimately proved successful and resulted
in a design that was accepted by the clinical staff. All the modules
of the EMR system were ready by end of 2006. A decision was then
made to continue with iterative design after the system had been
implemented. This would allow for changes to be made based on
knowledge obtained during the actual use of the system. This process was still ongoing at the time of the study.
4.3. Critical technical system features
One of the primary reasons that the system was ultimately successfully adopted was the inclusion of a number of technical and
social features of the system that intended to accommodate skeptical users and those lacking IT skills. The technical and social features were often interconnected in the sense that speciﬁc technical
features were developed into the EMR system in order to support
social changes. The critical technical and social system features
are described in the next two sections.
As noted previously one of the most challenges technical features of the system to develop was an effective user interface.
The strategy that Consultant_1 adopted in order to meet the needs
of the users was to not only focus on making the system fast and
easy to use, but also to make the interface as similar as possible
to working with paper records. He explained,
‘‘I have tried to keep the interfaces as similar as paper records,
so that users need not search for required ﬁelds to ﬁll in. In
addition, I have designed a template with relevant ﬁelds. For
example if an optometrist clicks on fundus examination, only
the ﬁeld relevant to this examination is displayed they need just
to ﬁll the ﬁelds with the ﬁnding after examination’’ (Consultant_1 Dec. 2007).
The similarities between paper and electronic records can be
seen in with the drawing tool shown in (Fig. 4) that was added
to the system. The tool is based on electronic pen-pad technology

964

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

Fig. 4. A tool that allows consultants to input drawings using a pen interface in a similar manor to the way they work with paper records.

and allows a consultant to draw pictures in a similar way to they
are used to drawing them with paper records. A picture of a paper
record with such a drawing is shown in (Fig. 5).
An additional technical feature of the system that was useful for
winning over users was an integrated paper backup system that allows the EMR system to be used in conjunction with the paper record system at the hospital. This not only made the system more
reliable, but it also allowed the hospital to make use of the EMR
system optional during clinical work. This enabled the hospital to
use the stepwise implementation process that is described later.
4.4. Critical social system features
In addition to technical features, targeted social change was an
important part of overall system. The implementation process was
developed during meetings containing members from all the different departments after system development had ﬁnished at the
end of 2006. The process included organizing training and awareness programs, and technical support for both health staff and
administrative staff. Demo-CDs were distributed to users that allow them to practice using the system at home and, for example,
learn the interface and templates used. Users were also given the
option of practicing online via the hospital web page. The implementation process also considered the issue of some users being
inexperienced using computers. One of the managers explained
that,
‘‘First we selected a group of users who are fond of technology,
and use computers more often. We trained them ﬁrst. They
learned the system very fast and were trainers for other people’’. (Manager_1 Nov. 2007.)

4.4.1. Stepwise Implementation
Another implementation tactic was the employment of a stepwise implementation process. The goal of this process was to
slowly introduce the EMR system so that the clinical staff would
have a considerable amount of time to get used to the system before using it during all clinical work.

Fig. 5. A paper record at SN with a drawing that is similar to those created with the
drawing tool in the EMR system.

The stepwise implementation process involved the system ﬁrst
being used at the evening outpatient clinic, and only for patients visiting the hospital for the ﬁrst time. An electronic record was created
for each of these new patients and existing patients were continued
to be serviced with their existing paper record. A limit was also imposed so that members of the health staff used the EMR system for a
limited number of patients each day, and treated the rest of their patients while using paper records. The number of patients they serviced while using the EMR system was slowly increased until all
the new patients visiting the evening clinic were consulted with
an electronic record. The same strategy was then applied for patients
visiting the day clinic. At the time of the study some of the new patients at the day clinic were still having a paper record created for
them. Since that time the day clinic has also completed this process.
The system is thus fully implemented at this time as all new patients
visiting the hospital have an electronic record created for them.
4.4.2. Optional usage of the EMR with incentives for use
In addition to supporting a stepwise implementation process
the paper backup system also allowed SN to make the use of

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

Fig. 6. A screen shot showing a list of the top 10 most active EMR users among
optometrists.

electronic records during clinical consultation completely optional
for the health staff. They could choose to use the system, or if they
felt uncomfortable with it, they can work with a paper print out of
the electronic record of a patient.
Since the use of the system is optional, the management created
economic and social incentives in order to encourage the adoption
of the system by the clinical staff. Before the EMR system was in
use the optometrists received a ﬁnancial bonus for every patient
they checked after the 12th patient each day. After implementing
the EMR system however, the management decided to give this bonus only for extra patients checked while using the EMR system.
Social incentives were also created by developing a ‘Top 10 list’
of health staff that shows the most frequent users for each month.
The ‘Top 10 list’ is shown in (Fig. 6) and is displayed to each user
every time they log onto the system. It is interesting to note that
the ‘‘Top 10 List’’ is an illustrative example of a technical feature
in the system that was developed for the sole purpose of creating
change by altering social attitudes towards the technology.
4.4.3. Making computing more natural for users
Another way in which management attempted to change attitudes towards the system was to help users feel more comfortable
with computing in general by supporting their use of computers in
other contexts. Computers were installed in reading rooms and
resting rooms for the heath staff that they can use for general purposes, such as sending email and surﬁng the Internet. Another tactic employed was to provide assistance to users that choose to have
a computer at home. The IT manager of the hospital explained,
‘‘We are trying our best, helping health staff at personal level.
Hospital management has decided that if any health staff wants
to purchase computer, one of our staff will do counseling and
help in installation and provide technical assistance. ’’ (Manager_4 Dec 2007).

5. Discussion
One of the signiﬁcant ﬁndings of the study was that, similar to
large hospital environments in developed countries, the design
environment at SN proved to be quite complex. A number of challenges were in place that easily could have derailed the system
from ever being successfully adopted. Early versions of the system
did in fact fail due to user resistance. Despite these challenges
however a version of the EMR system that was acceptable to the
health staff was eventually adopted into clinical practice.
A signiﬁcant factor related to the complex organizational environment at SN was that the EMR system was expected to deliver a
wide range of beneﬁts. Many of these beneﬁts such as improved

965

support for Telemedicine and reduction in storage space and waiting times have not been previously reported as reasons to adopt
EMR systems in developing countries [1]. Support for Telemedicine
adds additional technical and social requirements on a system with
issues such as data security, effects on work ﬂow, and incentive
structures becoming more complicated. The reduction in storage
space and waiting times also seems to be a highly relevant issue
for urban hospitals in developing countries. Storage of records
may be problematic due to a high density of patients. Poor ICT
infrastructure and a lack of cultural norms using technology may
make the practice of creating prior appointments more difﬁcult
for patients. The potential beneﬁts for EMR systems may thus be
even broader in the context of developing countries than has been
reported for developed countries, in the sense that they can help to
meet similar needs related to supporting clinical work and research, and also can be used to help mitigate some speciﬁc local
challenges related to overpopulation and lack of resources and
infrastructure.
The broad potential beneﬁts for these systems also present
additional challenges as they will present additional technical
and social system requirements. This can be considered in light
of existing studies of EMR systems in developing countries, that
have not been conducted at large hospitals, and have generally
not reported on issues related to organizational complexity like
studies from developed countries [1]. This leaves an unclear picture regarding the complexity that may be encountered when
designing EMR systems for large hospitals in the developing world.
This study suggests that in many contexts complex environments
similar to that encountered in developed countries can be encountered in developing countries. Understanding of socio-organizational issues, rather than only developed versus developing
world speciﬁc issues, will often be critical to the successful adoption of EMR systems. Robust design and implementation practices
will need to be employed, and further studies to improve understanding of the environment at speciﬁc hospitals contexts in developing countries related to the adoption of EMR systems should
prove valuable.
5.1. EMR design strategies
Although many details of the design method used at SN were
not uncovered during the study, the information that was available
from the data, points to a number of issues that can be used to aid
in the design of EMR systems. This includes issues related to design
strategy, and social and technical features of the systems.
5.1.1. Handling differing expectations from the system by different
actors
One perspective on the wide range of expectations and interests
in the EMR system at SN is that they may be considered in the context of the actors primary work activities [30]. This is somewhat related to the Task-technology ﬁt concept in that end user tasks
should match functionality [31]. The communication style and
mind state of stakeholders has different implications however, as
it helps to provide understanding of how different stakeholders
may view the system before and after it has been developed, and
also how to approach communication with these stakeholders. It
may also be useful for understanding potential political and organizational conﬂicts that may need to be considered throughout the
process of designing and implementing the system, and that may
need to be eventually reﬂected in the features of the system itself.
A number of the expected beneﬁts for the system were related
to supporting clinical work, such as easier access to patient records,
the use of decision support systems and support for evidence based
medicine, Many of the expected beneﬁts reported by non-clinical
staff however involve secondary usage of EMR data outside the

966

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

context of which the data is produced (the clinical context), such as
to support research and administrative tasks. The management at
SN for example was interested in a wide variety of non clinical uses
of the system including support for administrative work. The
majority of work inputting data into the system however is done
by health staff in the clinical context. A potential disparity in beneﬁts and work thus exists. Early versions of the EMR system were
not created with extensive input from the clinical staff and were
indeed rejected by them because of usability problems in the clinical context. The failure to gain the necessary input from the clinical staff on these versions of the system can be explained by the
issues mentioned above. Discussions with managers may not have
made it obvious to the design teams about how critically necessary
it would be to engage the clinical staff for input. Additionally,
approaching the staff for input would not have been intuitive for
them, since it would not be a usual part of organizational change
processes.
Although they do create additional challenges, the wide interests in the system may also provide an advantage however since
it has been noted that the more collective beneﬁts that a system
is expected to bring, that the more the management will be committed to ensuring its success [23]. At SN there were indications
of this since the hospital management was dedicated to the success
of the system to such a large extent that they were willing to accept an open ended process of iterative design over several years
that included two rounds of complete failure.
When considered together these issues may be of interest when
approaching design for the organization as a whole, and also when
communicating design strategies and processes to hospital management and other stakeholders that may affect EMR adoption.
This knowledge may be applied for example in order to gain support for iterative participatory design by communicating the
following:
– Emphasize the broad collective beneﬁts of the system (as suggested in [23]).
– Clarify beneﬁts to the respective managers’ primary work
activities.
– Stress the critical issue of effective design for the clinical context and need for extensive user input over a long period of time
both before and after implementation.
5.1.2. System features to support challenging users
In addition to the complex setting at SN other factors related to
the work staff complicated the adoption of the system. Users had
rejected previous versions of the system and many of them lacked
IT skills. These are highly relevant issues when designing EMR systems in both developing and developed countries. Studies of EMR
systems in the developed world have noted a lack of computing
skills as a speciﬁc issue which can lead to system failure [15].
The high failure rate of MI systems due to user and staff resistance
[8] also suggests that projects will often be conducted in a context
where users have previously rejected systems. The success at SN in
dealing with such a user group gives a concrete example of how in
some contexts it is possible to overcome these challenges. Some
speciﬁc (technical and social) features of the EMR system design
at SN can serve as starting points when considering how to meet
organizational and user needs in similar environments (including
skeptical users and those lacking IT skills) in both developing and
developed countries. These include:
 Investigate user interfaces based on efﬁcient templates for data
entry that are as similar as possible to paper records. While this
may not be the preferred method in some contexts, it may help
reduce resistance in difﬁcult environments by making the system easier to learn, and by making the transition from paper

to electronic records more natural for users. It may also be a
method to help guide the work of a physician champion serving
as the leader of the UI design team (as was the case at SN). Clinical staff often struggle, and can overcomplicate matters, when
given too much control over UI design [20]. Having a target that
is concrete and straightforward can help avoid this problem and
may help to increase the success rate of their work.
 Consider optional rather than mandatory use of the system
while creating incentives for users to adopt it. This method
may be particularly useful in contexts with high potential risk
for failure, yet with high potential for reward for successful
implementation. This approach may also put technical requirements on the system, such as requiring a fully functional paper
backup system to be included. The speciﬁc incentives that will
be appropriate are likely to be highly situational and will need
to be tailored to each individual context.
 Users that lack computing experience may be helped by programs that promote computing outside the EMR context.
 The implementation process may beneﬁt by creating a ‘‘snowball
effect’’ where technology savvy users are ﬁrst trained with the
system, and then used in order to assist in training other users.
5.1.3. Participatory design and implementation
The process for design and implementation of the system may
also be worth considering when approaching the development of
EMR systems in similar settings. It is widely accepted that user input is valuable during the design process. The best method(s) for
obtaining user input is still a fairly open question however. In addition to challenges related to comparing studies done in different
cultural contexts, another challenge is that formal experiments
comparing different methods for gaining user input are very difﬁcult to perform in a real workplace context [19]. This study is thus
notable in that it reports on failed and successful design processes
at the same hospital, and also in that the data was collected, and is
being reported by, outsiders not involved in the design process.
The second version of the EMR system was designed by an
experienced consultancy ﬁrm that gained input from key personnel at SN. The design team still did not manage to create an acceptable design with this process however. Considering the
hierarchical nature of SN, and lack of existing structures such as labor unions that could be used for interacting with different user
groups, it is not surprising that the initial participatory design
strategy did not directly involve users of the system beyond the
management level. User input from a few managers during the initial phase of software development deemed to be inadequate
however.
The process that eventually lead to an acceptable design at SN
used an extensive version of participatory design and implementation, that included the use of cooperative and evolutionary prototyping [32,33] and that continued with iterative improvements
after the system had been implemented. Users were also more
extensively involved in the process than by only providing design
input to external consultants. Staff from the hospital lead the UI
design team, created and communicated their designs directly to
the software development team, and performed software development. An integrated approach was also used between design and
implementation with many of the same staff being involved in
both phases. The concept of a ‘‘physician champion’’ has been reported as key to successful implementation of EMR systems
[14,15]. In this case the physician champion also led the UI design
team. This strategy may prove effective for a variety of reasons
including that the contacts and knowledge the person has throughout the hospital can be used to help organize user input when
there is a lack of unions or other organizations to help recruit users.
Some of the IT staff that was hired by the vendor to conduct
software development will also return to the hospital in the future

J. Scholl et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 958–967

to help with support, maintenance and iterative improvements of
the system independently from the vendor. This process reﬂects
the current discussion critiquing PD conducted by external designers as often failing to provide the necessary level of user input over
time [34]. The experience at SN gives a concrete example of how to
start building teams that allow in depth knowledge obtained during the design, development and implementation of an EMR system to be contained within a hospital. This may thus used as a
starting point in considering how to ‘‘design a [socio-technical]
system that more or less then designs itself’’ ([34], p. S103) The
long term success of the strategy in allowing SN to continue with
iterative improvements of the system independently from the vendor is still unclear however, and is something worthy of investigation in the future.
5.2. Limitations
As with all case studies the usual limitations must be noted with
respect to problems that may arise when trying to generalize the
results in dissimilar settings [35]. In India for example many health
workers at public hospitals are members of labor unions. In that situation the relationship between management, EMR design teams,
and health care workers may be fundamentally different than
reported in this study. The limitations with data analysis noted in
the methods section are also worth re-stating, as the somewhat limited scope of the study during the data collection phase, and problems in conducting further data analysis due to partial data loss,
may have resulted in a number of interesting and important issues
related to the ﬁndings not being reported in the study.
6. Conclusions
A wide range of factors can affect the adoption of EMR systems
at large hospitals in developing countries. A wide range of potential
beneﬁts can be attributed to these systems, and some of these beneﬁts, such as reducing waiting times for patients, may in fact be
greater for hospitals in the developing world than in the developed
world. Similar to the developed world the environment at large
hospitals in developing countries can be quite complex. Challenges
related to meeting varying interests in the system from different
actors, and in accommodating skeptical users and those that lack
IT skills will be encountered in many situations.
These challenges are possible to overcome however through the
use of effective communication practices with managers in order
to win support for the use of PD methods, and the extensive use
of these methods. High levels of user input from the clinical staff
will be needed and can be aided by the use of techniques such as
cooperative and evolutionary prototyping, as well as an integrated
approach to design and implementation that includes using the
physician champion as the lead UI designer.
The eventual system that is implemented may need to include
features that pay special attention to accommodating skeptical
users and those lacking IT skills. Consider pursuing user interfaces
that are very similar to paper records in order to help users feel
more comfortable with adopting the system. Social elements of
the system that include social and ﬁnancial incentives to use the
system, as well as programs that help promote computing outside
the work context, may also prove valuable.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank everyone at SN for their cooperation and Per Hasvold for valuable input. This research is supported by the Research Council of Norway, Grant No. 176852/S10.

967

References
[1] Fraser HS et al. Implementing electronic medical record systems in developing
countries. Inform Prim Care 2005;13(2):83–96.
[2] Lobach DF, Detmer DE. Research challenges for electronic health records. Am J
Prev Med 2007;32(5S):104–11.
[3] Mildon J, Cohen T. Drivers in the electronic medical records market. Health
Manag Technol 2001;22(5):14–9.
[4] England I, Stewart D. Health: IT leader or laggard? A comparative assessment
of IT maturity. Aust Health Rev 2003;26(2):114–20.
[5] Berg M. Health information management: integrating information and
communication technology in health care work. London: Routledge; 2003.
[6] Aanestad M, Hanseth O. Implementing open network technologies in complex
work practices: a case from telemedicine. In: HOIT. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers; 2000.
[7] Orlikowski J, Yates J. ICT and organizational change: a commentary. J Appl
Behav Sci 2006;42:127–39.
[8] Anderson JG, Aydin CE. Evaluating the organizational impact of healthcare
information systems. New York: Springer; 2005.
[9] Pratt W et al. Incorporating ideas from computer-supported cooperative work.
J Biomed Inform 2004;37(2):128–37.
[10] Westbrook JI et al. Multi-method evaluation of information and
communication technologies in health in the context of wicked problems
and socio-technical theory. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2007;14(6):746–55.
[11] Keshavjee K, et al. Best practices in EMR implementation: a systematic review.
In: iSHIMR. Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada: Dalhousie University; 2006.
[12] Nikula RE. Why implementing EPR’s does not bring about organizational
changes – a qualitative approach. Stud Health Technol Inform 2001;84:666–9.
[13] Rose AF et al. Using qualitative studies to improve the usability of an EMR. J
Biomed Inform 2005;38(1):51–60.
[14] Scott T et al. Kaiser Permanente’s experience of implementing an electronic
medical record: a qualitative study. Brit Med J 2005;331:1313–6.
[15] Øvretveit J et al. Improving quality through effective implementation of
information technology in healthcare. Int J Qual Health Care
2007;19(5):259–66.
[16] Martínez A et al. Analysis of information and communication needs in rural
primary health care in developing countries. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed
2005;9(1):66–72.
[17] Ludwick DA, Doucette J. Adopting electronic medical records in primary care:
lessons learned from health information systems implementation experience
in seven countries. Int J Med Inform 2009;78(1):22–31.
[18] Simonsen J, Hertzum M. A regional PD strategy for EPR systems: evidencebased IT development. In: PDC. Trento, Italy: ACM Press; 2006.
[19] Muller MJ. Participatory design: the third space in HCI. In: Jacko JA, Sears A,
editors. The human computer interaction handbook: fundamentals, evolving
technologies and emerging applications. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum;
2002. p. 1051–68.
[20] Berg M. Implementing information systems in health care organizations:
myths and challenges. Int J Med Inform 2001;64(2–3):143–56.
[21] Berg M. Patient care information systems and health care work: a
sociotechnical approach. Int J Med Inform 1999;55(2):87–101.
[22] Coiera E. Four rules for the reinvention of health care. Brit Med J
2004;328(7449):1197–9.
[23] Grudin J. Groupware and social dynamics: eight challenges for developers.
Commun ACM 1994;37(1):92–105.
[24] Heath C, Luff P. Documents and professional practice: ‘‘bad’’ organisational
reasons for ‘‘good’’ clinical records. In: CSCW. Boston, Massachusetts, United
States: ACM Press; 1996.
[25] Johansen MA, et al. Garbage In, Garbage Out – extracting disease surveillance
data from EPR systems in primary care. In: CSCW. San Diego, CA, USA: ACM
Press; 2008.
[26] Surana S et al. Deploying a rural wireless telemedicine system: experiences in
sustainability. IEEE Comput 2008;41(6):48–56.
[27] Forsythe DE. It’s just a matter of common sense: ethnography as invisible
work. Comput Support Coop Work 1999;8:127–45.
[28] Eisenhardt KM. Building theories from case study research. Acad Manage Rev
1989;14(4):532–50.
[29] Randall D, Harper R, Rounceﬁeld M. Fieldwork for design: theory and practice
(computer supported cooperative work). Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.; 2007
[30] Skattør B, et al. A framework for mobile services supporting mobile non-ofﬁce
workers. In: HCI International. Beijing, China: Springer; 2007.
[31] Dishawa MT, Strong DM. Extending the technology acceptance model with
task-technology ﬁt constructs. Inform Manage 1999;36(1):9–21.
[32] Bødker S, Grønbæk K. Design in action: from prototyping by demonstration to
cooperative prototyping. In: Kyng JGAM, editor. Design at work: cooperative
design of computer systems. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates; 1992. p.
197–218.
[33] Anderson WL, Crocca WT. Engineering practice and codevelopment of product
prototypes. Commun ACM 1993;36(6):49–56.
[34] Coiera E. Putting the technical back into socio-technical systems research. Int J
Med Inform 2007;76(S1):S98–S103.
[35] Oates BJ. Case studies. In: Researching information systems and
computing. London: Sage Publications; 2006. p. 141–53.

