Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

A comparative study of covariance selection models for the inference of
gene regulatory networks
Patrizia F. Stifanelli a, Teresa M. Creanza a, Roberto Anglani a, Vania C. Liuzzi a, Sayan Mukherjee c,
Francesco P. Schena b, Nicola Ancona a,⇑
a
b
c

Istituto di Studi sui Sistemi Intelligenti per l’Automazione, CNR-ISSIA, Via Amendola 122/D-O, I-70126 Bari, Italy
Dipartimento Emergenza e Trapianti di Organi, DETO, Università di Bari, I-70124 Bari, Italy
Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Center for Interdisciplinary Engineering, Medicine and Applied Sciences, Duke University, 101 Science Drive, Durham, NC 27708, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 21 February 2013
Accepted 8 July 2013
Available online 20 July 2013
Keywords:
Gaussian graphical models
Gene networks
Pathway analysis
Covariance selection

a b s t r a c t
Motivation: The inference, or ‘reverse-engineering’, of gene regulatory networks from expression data
and the description of the complex dependency structures among genes are open issues in modern
molecular biology.
Results: In this paper we compared three regularized methods of covariance selection for the inference of
gene regulatory networks, developed to circumvent the problems raising when the number of observations n is smaller than the number of genes p. The examined approaches provided three alternative estimates of the inverse covariance matrix: (a) the ‘PINV’ method is based on the Moore–Penrose
pseudoinverse, (b) the ‘RCM’ method performs correlation between regression residuals and (c) ‘‘2C’
method maximizes a properly regularized log-likelihood function. Our extensive simulation studies
showed that ‘2C outperformed the other two methods having the most predictive partial correlation estimates and the highest values of sensitivity to infer conditional dependencies between genes even when a
few number of observations was available. The application of this method for inferring gene networks of
the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways in Arabidopsis thaliana allowed to enlighten a negative partial correlation coefﬁcient between the two hubs in the two isoprenoid pathways and, more importantly, provided an evidence of cross-talk between genes in the plastidial and the cytosolic pathways. When
applied to gene expression data relative to a signature of HRAS oncogene in human cell cultures, the
method revealed 9 genes (p-value < 0.0005) directly interacting with HRAS, sharing the same Ras-responsive binding site for the transcription factor RREB1. This result suggests that the transcriptional activation
of these genes is mediated by a common transcription factor downstream of Ras signaling.
Availability: Software implementing the methods in the form of Matlab scripts are available at: http://
users.ba.cnr.it/issia/iesina18/CovSelModelsCodes.zip.
Ó 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. Open access under CC BY-NC-SA license.

1. Introduction
A challenging goal of systems biology is to provide quantitative
models for the study of complex interaction patterns among genes
and their products that are the result of many biological processes
in the cell, such as biochemical interactions and regulatory activities [23]. Among these models, gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
are essential representations for the comprehension of the development, functioning and pathology of biological organisms. Indeed, it is widely believed that the GRNs embody the

⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ancona@ba.issia.cnr.it (N. Ancona).

comprehensive information of the mechanisms that govern the
expression of the genes in the cell [28]. In particular, the GRNs inferred by genome-wide expression data depend on environmental
factors, tissue type, disease-state and experimental conditions.
This condition-speciﬁcity of GRNs play a major role for the study
of biological processes in distinct phenotypical conditions. Indeed,
under different conditions, networks exhibit different interaction
patterns that can enlighten the understanding of cell development
and the identiﬁcation of key drivers such as disease-related genes
or altered biological processes [28,51,31].
One of the simplest and most popular approaches in bioinformatics is to compute the sample Pearson correlation between
every pair of genes [7]. The resulting relevance network considers
two genes ‘not-linked’ in the case of marginal independence. This
method, although useful for unveiling co-expression of genes
implicated in the same biological process, has important shortcomings for the investigation of GRNs. For assessing co-expression

1532-0464 Ó 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. Open access under CC BY-NC-SA license.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.07.002

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

 A and B are regulated by the same transcription factor (TF)
which is not included in the network;
 A encodes a TF which directly regulates B;
 A encondes a TF which directly regulates an intermediate gene C
which encodes a TF that in turn regulates gene B, and C is not
included in the network;
 A encodes a protein which interacts with the TF encoded by an
intermediate gene, and modiﬁes its action on the transcription
of gene B.
In recent years, several reverse-engineering approaches have
been proposed for inferring regulatory networks from gene
expression data. The nature of the data makes this problem
clearly ill-posed. Indeed, the genomic data are typically characterized by a huge number p of genes and by a small number n
of samples. The simplest solution proposed to overcome this
problem was to reduce the numbers of genes in order to reach
the n > p regime [45]. Other solutions have been proposed to circumvent the problem of computing full partial correlation coefﬁcients by using only zero and ﬁrst order coefﬁcients [48,8,19].
However, these approaches do not take into account all multigene effects on each pair of variables. More sophisticated
approaches determine regularized estimates of the covariance
matrix and its inverse [50,17,49]. A fundamental assumption usually adopted by these methods in n < p regime is the sparsity of
biological networks: only a few edges are supposed to be present
in the gene regulatory networks, so that reliable estimates of the
graphical model can be inferred also in small sample case [8]. A
regularized GGM method based on a Stein-type shrinkage has
been applied to genomic data [13] and the network selection
has been based on false discovery rate multiple testing. The same
procedure to select the network has been adopted, with a
Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse method to obtain the precision
matrix [39]. Finally, the authors in [34] suggested an attractive
and simple approach based on lasso-type regression to select
the non-vanishing partial correlations, paving the way to a number of analysis and novel algorithms based on lasso ‘1 regularizations [50,17,49,18].
To date, a comparative analysis of these methods is missing. In
this work, we focus on recently proposed methods developed in
the general framework of regularization and statistical learning
theories which provide the state-of-art approaches for the study
of ill-posed problems as the ones in which the signal is overwhelmed by the noise and the number of variables is much larger
than the number of observations [46]. In particular, we focus on
regularized methods for the estimation of the precision matrix in
an undirected GGM. We present a comparative study of three
methods in terms of AUC (area under the Receiving Operative
Characteristic curve), mean square error (MSE), positive predictive
values (PPV) and sensitivity (SE). The ﬁrst method is based on

Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse (PINV); the second one provides
an estimate of the partial correlation coefﬁcients based on Regularized Least Square regression (RCM); the third method determines
an estimate of the precision matrix by maximizing a log-likelihood
function properly regularized by an ‘2 penalty term (‘2C). The conditional dependence between each pair of variables was assessed
by using the Efron’s bootstrap method [22]. Due to the lack of a
perfectly known ground truth related to real biological networks
[4], we measured the performance of the three methods by generating simulated data based on golden standard interaction patterns, built according to biological inspired different topologies
[18,40]. We found that the ‘2C method exhibited the most predictive partial correlation estimates. More importantly, this method
had the highest values of sensitivity showing its ability to infer true
conditional dependencies between genes also when a few number
of observations is available.
We assessed the ability of the ‘2C method to infer GRNs in two
real biological contexts: the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways in
Arabidopsis thaliana and the HRAS oncogenic signature in human
cell cultures. In the ﬁrst case, the method enlightened known relevant pathway properties. In particular, it revealed a negative partial correlation coefﬁcient between the two hubs in the two
isoprenoid pathways. This suggests a different response of the
pathways to the several tested experimental conditions and, together with the high connectivity of the two hubs, provides an evidence of cross-talk between genes in the plastidial and the
cytosolic pathways. In the second case, ‘2C method highlighted
34 genes directly interacting with HRAS. In particular, 9 of these
genes (p-value < 0.0005) shared the same Ras responsive transcription factor binding site, suggesting that their transcriptional activation is mediated by a common transcription factor downstream of
Ras signaling.
2. Methods
Let X ¼ ðX 1 ; . . . ; X p Þ 2 Rp be a random vector distributed according a multivariate normal distribution N ðl; RÞ. The interaction
structure among these variables can be described by means of a
graph G = (V,E), where V is the vertex set and E is the edge set. If
vertices of V identify the random variables X1, . . . , Xp, then the
edges of E represent the conditional dependence between the vertices. In other words, the absence of an edge between the ith and
jth vertex means a conditional independence between the associated variables Xi and Xj. The structure of a graph is properly described by a p  p matrix, called adjacency matrix A, with
elements aij = 1 if the variables Xi and Xj (vertices) are connected
by an edge and 0 otherwise.
In this study, we shall consider only undirected Gaussian graphs
G with pairwise Markov property, such that for all (i, j) R E one has

X i X j jX Vnfi;jg


between two genes, the Pearson correlation does not take into account the activities of the remaining genes in the cell. Moreover,
this method does not distinguish between direct and indirect interactions, and is not able to highlight regulations by a common gene.
These drawbacks may be overcome exploiting partial correlation, a more sophisticated statistical model which is able to infer
relations of conditional dependences among random variables
[10,47]. In this framework, Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs)
have been exploited to study and describe dependency structures
between random variables [14,26]. In our context, partial correlation assesses association between two genes by removing the effects of a set of controlling genes. Moreover, in a GGM an edge
uniquely indicates a direct interaction between a gene A and a gene
B, that can be interpreted biologically as one of the following
mechanisms [32]:

895

i; j ¼ 1; . . . ; p;

ð1Þ

i.e. Xi and Xj are conditionally independent being ﬁxed all other
variables XVn{i,j}. Since X follows a p  variate normal distribution,
the condition (1) turns out to be qijVn{i,j} = 0, where qijVn{i,j} is the
partial correlation coefﬁcient between the ith and jth variable, being
ﬁxed all other variables. It has been shown [26] that partial correlation matrix elements are related to the precision matrix (or inverse
covariance matrix) H = R1, as:

h
hii hjj

ij
qijVnfi;jg ¼  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
i – j;

ð2Þ

where hij are elements of H. In general, when the number of observations n is greater than the number of variables p, it is straightforward to evaluate hij in Eq. (2) by inverting the sample covariance
matrix. Moreover, in this case, a simple parametric test exists for

896

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

assessing the conditional independence between two variables [3].
Unfortunately, a typical genomic dataset is characterized by n < p,
so that the sample covariance matrix becomes not invertible [11].
In the successive sections we analyze three regularized methods
for estimating partial correlation matrixes and a simple non-parametric test based on Efron’s bootstrap method to use when n < p
for assessing conditional independence [22].

Consequently, the problem turns out to be an eigenvalue prob^ with eigenvectors ui,
lem. Indeed, if hi are eigenvalues of H

^ i ¼ h i ui
Hu

then si are the eigenvalues of S with the same eigenvectors, and the
 2khi ¼ si . Therefore the eigenrelation between hi and si is h1
i
^ can be evaluated as function of the eigenvalues si of S:
values hi of H

2.1. Partial correlation matrix estimation
For describing the three methods that we have analyzed, let us
consider the n  p data matrix

X ¼ ðX1 ; X2 ; . . . ; Xp Þ
where each column fXi gi¼1;...;p 2 Rn is a n  dimensional vector, with
^
n < p. Let S be the sample estimate of the covariance matrix R and H
be the estimate of inverse covariance matrix R1.
2.1.1. Pseudoinverse method ðPINVÞ
^ can be obtained as pseudoinThe estimated precision matrix H
verse of S, by using the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). Indeed, since S is a real and symmetric matrix, then its singular
value decomposition reduces to S = UKU> where U is a p  p unitary matrix whose columns are the eigenvectors of S and U> is
the transpose of U;K is p  p diagonal matrix whose entries are
the non-negative eigenvalues of S. Then, the pseudoinverse of S
is S+ = UK+U>, where K+ is obtained by replacing each positive
diagonal element of K with its reciprocal.
To improve the estimate of the partial correlation coefﬁcients,
^ [39]. In particular, we genwe evaluated a bootstrap version of H
erated B bootstrap replications Xb of the sample with b = 1, . . . , B
obtained by random sampling with replacement the raws of X.
For each replication, we evaluated the bootstrap replication Sb of
S and used these estimates for obtaining the bootstrap mean
P
^ was obtained as
SB ¼ 1B Bb¼1 Sb . Then the bootstrap estimate of H
^
HB ¼ SþB .
Finally, we estimated the partial correlation matrix as

^
H

B
ﬃ:
q^ ¼  qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

^ B diagH
^>
diagH
B

ð3Þ

2.1.2. Covariance-regularized method (‘2C)
Let us consider the loss function [3]

Ll ðS; HÞ ¼ TrðSHÞ  log detðSHÞ  p

ð4Þ

that vanishes when SH = I and is positive when SH – I. Since we
are dealing with the case of p > n, an estimate of H could be obtained minimizing with respect to H the ‘2-penalized loss
function:

Lp ðS; H; kÞ ¼ Ll ðS; HÞ þ Jðk; HÞ;

ð5Þ

where

Jðk; HÞ ¼ kkHk2F

ð6Þ

kHk2F

with k > 0 and
¼ trðH> HÞ is the Frobenius norm of H.
Note that, the minimization of Lp(S, H, k) with respect to H is
equivalent to the maximization of the penalized log-likelihood
[49]:

log detðHÞ  TrðSHÞ  kkHk2F :

ð7Þ

Differentiating with respect to H means to solve the following
equation

^ 1  2kH
^ ¼ S:
H

ð8Þ

ð9Þ

hi

si
¼ 
4k

qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s2i þ 8k
4k

:

ð10Þ

Since precision matrix must be positive deﬁnite, the correct va^
lue of hi is hþ
i . Then, for the spectral theorem, H is given by

^ ¼
H

‘
X
hþi ui u>i :

ð11Þ

i¼1

The regularization parameter k was selected by using the cross
validation procedure. In particular, for each value of k in a suitable
range, we carried out 20 random splits of the dataset in training Xt
and validation Xv sets and evaluated the corresponding sample
covariance matrices St and Sv. Consequently, we estimated Hkt by
minimizing the penalized loss function in Eq. (5) and evaluated
the loss function in Eq. (4), averaged over the 20 splits,
hLl ðSv ; Hkt Þi. The selected k value was

k ¼ arg mink hLl ðSv ; Hkt Þi:

ð12Þ

This procedure selected the lambda minimizing the distance between the empirical inverse precision matrix computed on the
training set Xt and the sample covariance matrix computed on the
validation set Xv.
2.1.3. Residual correlation method ðRCMÞ
Let us consider a linear regression model for the variables Xi and
Xj given all the p  2 remaining variables:

Xi ¼ Xninj bi

Xj ¼ Xninj bj

ð13Þ

where bi 2 Rp2 is the regression coefﬁcient vector referred to the
ith gene; Xi is the ith column of the matrix X and Xninj is X without
the ith and jth column. Note that the bias term is implicitly present
in our model. This is done by including a component constant and
equal to one to the input vectors. The Regularized Least Square
(RLS) [20,2] method evaluates the regression models (13) by solving

minbi 2Rp2

1
kXi  Xninj bi k22 þ lkbi k22 :
n

ð14Þ

^ i and X
^ j are the RLS
where l > 0 is the regularization parameter. If X
estimates of Xi and Xj, one can evaluate the residual vectors
^ i  Xi and rj ¼ X
^ j  Xj . This allows to evaluate the partial corri ¼ X
^
relation coefﬁcient qijjp2 between the ith and jth variable being
ﬁxed all other (p  2) variables as the Pearson correlation r ri rj between the residuals, i.e.

covðr ; r Þ
varðri Þvarðrj Þ

i j
ﬃ:
q^ ijjðp2Þ ¼ rri rj ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

ð15Þ

Finally, the l parameter was chosen by minimizing the LeaveOne-Out cross validation errors [30].
2.2. Non-parametric test for conditional independence
The conditional independence structure among variables and
^ was inferred calculating a 95% conﬁthen the estimated graph A
dence interval for each entry qij, by using Efron’s bootstrap method
[22]. The graph selection procedure is as follows:

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

(I) Build B = 100 bootstrap replications by drawing randomly
with replacement n rows from X.
^ b for each b = 1, . . . , B.
(II) Evaluate q
^ ð2Þ
^ ðBÞ
^ ð1Þ
(III) Rank the bootstrap replications q
ij 6 qij 6 . . . 6 qij .
(IV) Compute the 95% conﬁdence interval ðqLij ; qUij Þ where
U
^ ðBþ1kÞ ; k ¼ B a2 and a = 0.05.
qLij ¼ q^ ðkÞ
ij ; qij ¼ qij
L
^ij ¼ 0 otherwise.
(V) âij = 1 if 0 R ðqij ; qUij Þ; a
2.3. Simulation study
We conducted an extensive simulation study for analyzing the
performances of the three methods in terms of their ability to infer
conditional dependency structures among variables in the case of
n 	 p. In a nutshell, the simulation study was composed of three
main steps: (a) building a graph with a well deﬁned and biologically inspired structure and the corresponding precision matrix;
(b) generating observations of the p random variables according
to the dependency structure deﬁned by the graph; and (c) comparing the inferred graph with the one used for generating the data in
terms of estimated partial correlations and predicted edges.
2.3.1. Graph building
We built gold standard graphs GGoS by deﬁning adjacency
matrices AGoS according to three different kinds of patterns
[18,36]:
Random: AGoS is randomly generated by inserting approximately p nonzero entries;
Hubs: the rows/columns of AGoS are partitioned into K disjoint
groups of q variables. Each group consists of ﬁve hubs
with high degree, and the other q  5 nodes with lower
degrees. This setting is designed to simulate scale-freelike gene regulatory networks, which tipically contain a
few hub genes plus many other nodes with only a few
connections.
Clique: the rows/columns of AGoS are partitioned into K disjoint
groups of q variables fully connected, i. e. each group is a
clique.

E
pðp  1Þ=2

ð16Þ

where E is the number of edges of the graph and p(p  1)/2 is the
size of a complete graph with p nodes.
2.3.2. Data set generation
Given a gold standard graph deﬁned by an adjacency matrix
AGoS, there exists a family of precision matrices HGoS, or equivalently of partial correlation matrices qGoS, associated to the graph
constituted by all the real positive deﬁnite p  p symmetric matrices having zeros in the same positions as AGoS [8]. In order to simplify the simulation study, we decided to build partial correlation
matrices having constant non-zero entries. In other words, the partial correlation between any pair of conditionally dependent variables was constant all over the graph. To this end, for a given
adjacency matrix AGoS, the associated concentration matrix HGoS
was built as:

HGoS ¼

1
AGoS þ Ip
mþ

set X was generated by sampling n times a p-variate normal distribution N ð0; RGoS Þ, with zero mean and covariance matrix RGoS,
where RGoS ¼ H1
GoS .
2.3.3. Performance measures
The performances of the three methods were assessed by using
different criteria. The ﬁrst one aimed to quantify the accuracy of a
method in estimating the partial correlation values. To this end, we
^
evaluated the mean square error (MSE) between the estimated q
and gold standard qGoS partial correlation matrices:

MSE ¼

sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
XX
2
2
^ ij  qGoS
ðq
ij Þ :
pðp  1Þ i j>i

ð18Þ

The second criterion aimed to assess a method in terms of prediction accuracy of the entries of AGoS by using the estimated par^ as predictor variable. In particular, we
tial correlation values q
wanted to quantify the prediction error of a binary classiﬁer which
predicts the entries of the gold standard adjacency matrix AGoS as
^ ij . To this end,
¼ 1) or non edge (aGoS
¼ 0) based upon q
edge (aGoS
ij
ij
we evaluated the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) which assesses
the performances of a binary classiﬁer as its discrimination threshold is varied. AUC is equal to the probability that a classiﬁer will
rank randomly a chosen positive instance higher than a randomly
chosen negative one [15]. We chose AUC as measure of performance because it is not inﬂuenced by the prevalence of a class
and it is independent from the selection rule used to infer the
graph. The AUCs evaluated for the three methods were compared
with the AUC measured for a random algorithm which assigns randomly and with the same probability 0 or 1 independently of the
estimated partial correlation values [4]. The third criterion aimed
^ inferred
to evaluate a method by comparing the estimated graph A,
^ , with the gold standard graph given by AGoS. Positive
by using q
Predicted Values (PPV) and sensitivity (SE) were evaluated for
^ and AGoS. The last criteria consisted in measuring
comparing A
^ matrix.
the computational time required for estimating the q
3. Results
3.1. Results on simulated data

The density d of AGoS is deﬁned as:

d¼

897

ð17Þ

P
where m ¼ maxi j aij ;  > 0 and Ip is the p order identity matrix.
Since AGoS is a symmetric matrix having diag (AGoS) = 0 by deﬁnition, then diag (HGoS) = Ip. As a consequence, qGoS =  HGoS (see
Eq. 2). Moreover, the precision matrix deﬁned in Eq. (17) is strictly
diagonally dominant and then is positive deﬁnite. Finally, the data

The performances of the three methods were analyzed keeping
constant the number of variables to p = 400, while varying the
number of samples n in the range [30] with step 30. For each value
of n, the results were averaged over 20 repetitions. Moreover, for
each value of n and for each generated graph structure (random,
hubs, clique), all the methods were applied on the same simulated
data sets.
3.1.1. MSE analysis
The methods exhibited very different accuracies in the estimate of the true partial correlation values. The comparison was
carried out keeping constant the graph density to d = 0.01 and
evaluating MSE both globally on the whole partial correlation matrix qGoS, and evaluating MSE limitedly to the non null entries of
qGoS corresponding to the true edges of the gold standard graph
(see Fig. 1). We denote these two errors as MSE and edge-MSE.
This choice was due to the fact that the true partial correlation
matrices used in our simulations were generally sparse having
only a few non-null entries. For small values of n, RCM method
exhibited poor accuracy, showing the highest MSE and edgeMSE errors. The behavior of the two errors was comparable indicating that the method behaves uniformly on the whole graph.
Although insufﬁcient in accuracy, the method had performances
invariant with respect to the graph topology and its accuracy increased with n.

898

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

Fig. 1. Comparison of the methods by varying the graph topology and n, with a graph density of d = 0.01. The left panel (pictures (a)–(c)) shows the mean square error (MSE)
evaluated on the whole qGoS matrix; the right panel (pictures (d)–(f)) shows the mean square error evaluated limitedly to the non null entries of qGoS (edge-MSE).

A better accuracy was reached by PINV and ‘2C methods,
specially for small values of n. The performances of PINV method
were not inﬂuenced by the graph topology and the MSE and
edge-MSE
errors
remained
comparable
in
all
the
simulations. Nevertheless, we observed a ‘‘resonance effect’’
associated to this method for n 
 p, conﬁrming a behavior well
known in literature [37,39]. Increasing the number of observations n up to p the performance of the method got worse. For
values of n larger than p, the error associated to PINV decreased
by increasing n.
Contrarily to RCM and PINV, the accuracy of the ‘2C method was
found different when evaluated on the whole graph or limitedly to
the edges only (see Fig. 1). In particular, we measured MSE 
 0.01
and edge-MSE 
 0.04 for both random and hubs graphs, independently to n. A larger difference was found in clique graph topology.
This discrepancy in accuracy is due to the regularization term
introduced in the penalized loss function (see Eq. (7)). Indeed, ‘2C
method selects precision matrices with small Frobenius norm
and as a consequence, underestimates the partial correlation values. The important aspect of this method is that its accuracy is
poorly inﬂuenced by the number of available observations and
by the graph intrinsic topology.

3.1.2. AUC analysis
The analysis of the performances in terms of AUC highlighted
other interesting properties of the methods. While the MSE analysis evaluated the methods by comparing the true and the estimated
partial correlation values, the AUC analysis assessed the methods
by comparing the accuracy in the prediction of the gold standard
graph by using the partial correlation estimates produced by the
methods. The important aspect to underline is that AUC analysis
is independent of the prediction rule and highlights properties of
the variable used as predictor. The Fig. 2 depicts the behaviors of
AUC evaluated for the three methods by varying n, for p = 400
and d = 0.01. All the three methods provided satisfactory results
also for very small values of n because they outperformed signiﬁcantly the performances of a random algorithm (see Supplemental
Information). For example, in the case of random graph topology,
‘2C and RCM exhibited AUC = 0.64 with 95% CI [0.59, 0.67] for
n = 30 observations; PINV showed AUC = 0.61 with 95% CI
[0.56, 0.65] for n = 60 observations. In general, our simulations
showed that ‘2C and RCM provided partial correlation estimates
with a prediction accuracy higher than PINV. Moreover, for these
two methods, it was sufﬁcient to exploit a number of observations
greater than the 15% of the number of the variables for having an

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

899

Fig. 2. Comparison of the methods in terms of AUC for (a) random, (b) hubs, (c) clique graph topologies by varying n, with a density of d = 0.01. The ‘-x-’ line style depicts the
^ matrix. The timings are in seconds.
AUC of a random classiﬁer. (d) Comparison of the methods in terms of the computational time required for estimating the q

AUC value greater than 0.7. The accuracy of the partial correlation
values estimated by ‘2C and RCM methods improved by increasing
the number of observations. On the contrary, the estimates produced by PINV method suffered for n 
 p of the same instability
found in MSE analysis.
Another interesting property highlighted by the AUC analysis
was the dependency of the accuracy on graph topology. In fact,
as Fig. 2(a)–(c) show, the best accuracies were obtained for clique
graphs and the worse for hub graphs. The reason of these different
performances, obtained keeping constant the density d in all the
simulations, resides in the degree distribution of the graph. With
the degree term we mean the number of nodes connected to a given node, or equivalently, the number of variables conditionally
dependent on a given variable. In fact, in the case of clique topology, the graph was composed of K = 80 disjoint cliques, each composed of q = 5 variables. In this case, the number of variables
conditionally dependent on a given variable had a constant value
of q  1 and this number was also the maximum number of variables conditionally dependent. In the case of random graphs, the
number of edges connected to a given node had a binomial distribution B(p  1, d). So, with a density of d = 0.01 and p = 400, we had
a mean degree of pd = 4, with a range of [0, 11]. This is equivalent to
saying that 11 was the maximum number of variables conditionally dependent on a given variable. Finally, in the case of hub topology, the graph was composed of K = 10 disjoint groups each
composed of q = 40 variables, giving a mean degree equal to 4 with
a range of [0, 19].
The dependency of the AUC on density and graph topology was
conﬁrmed by two different simulations (Fig. 3). In the ﬁrst one,
limitedly to the random graph topology, each method was analyzed by varying the density of the graph. In the second one, keeping the density ﬁxed to d = 0.01, each method was analyzed by
varying the graph topology. As the Fig. 3(a), (c) and (e) show, the
lower the density, the more accurate the estimates for all the
methods. Moreover, as the Fig. 3(b), (d) and (f) show, the accuracy

of the estimates decreased going from clique to hub graphs for all
the methods consistently.

3.1.3. PPV and sensitivity analysis
The estimate of the partial correlation values is only the ﬁrst
step of any graph inference procedure and the accuracy of the estimates provided by the three methods was assessed in the two previous sections. With the sensitivity analysis addressed in this
section, we assessed the whole graph inference procedure described in the Methods section, which exploited the estimates provided by the methods for inferring a graph. As performance
measure we used PPV and sensitivity evaluated comparing the
gold standard graph with the one inferred by the procedure. For
each value of n, the values were averaged over 20 repetitions and
evaluated for hub graph topology. Fig. 4 depicts the behaviors of
PPV and sensitivity as a function of n. PINV was the only method
that, for small values of n, had PPV and sensitivity values smaller
than those provided by the random algorithm. RCM and ‘2C, on
the contrary, showed PPV and sensitivity values greater than the
random algorithm, even for a small number of observations. In particular, ‘2C method exhibited the best performances in terms of
sensitivity, consistently for all the values of n, indicating that this
method was able to infer true conditional dependences between
variables also when a few number of observations is available.
Note that the PPV and sensitivity values shown in Fig. 4 have not
to be considered as absolute indicators of the performances of a
method. On the contrary, they have to be considered as indicative
of the relative performances of a method with respect to another
one, because assessed for a speciﬁc experimental condition, equal
for all the methods. More importantly, these values have to be signiﬁcantly different from those obtained by random algorithms.
Moreover, the values of PPV and sensitivity of a method heavily depend on the strength of the partial correlation existing among the
variables. The partial correlation values used in our simulations

900

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

Fig. 3. Performances of a method in terms of AUC. Left panel: constant graph topology and variable d. Right panel: constant d and variable graph topology.

Fig. 4. PPV and Sensitivity of the methods as a function of n.

were close to zero (see Eq. 17), so generating critical experimental
conditions for the methods.
In the light of the simulation results described so far, and considering the computational time required by the three methods
(see Fig. 2(d)), we choose ‘2C as the method to apply for inferring
biological networks. This choice was motivated by the AUC behavior which outperformed the other two methods in all the considered graph topologies and, mainly, by the sensitivity of the
method.

3.2. Application to gene expression data
We applied ‘2C method for the inference of gene regulatory networks from DNA microarray data in two different contexts. The
ﬁrst concerned the cross-talk between the two isoprenoid pathways of the model system A. thaliana. In this case we applied the
method to a well studied benchmark data set for the inference of
gene networks [48,19] and compared our ﬁndings with the ones
reported in literature. The second concerned the investigation of

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

the genes interacting with the oncogene HRAS. In this case we applied the method to a gene expression data set with strong a priori
biological knowledge [6]. In fact these data were used for inferring
a signature of HRAS through its in vitro overexpression.

3.2.1. Isoprenoid pathways in A. thaliana
The isoprenoids are a large class of organic compounds derived
from isoprene. They play various important roles in plants as: quinones in electron transport chains, structural components of membranes, photosynthetic pigments, hormones, defense compounds,
attractants for pollinators and in subcellular targeting and regulation [21]. Isoprenoids are synthesized through condensation of the
ﬁve-carbon intermediates isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and
dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) [24]. In higher plants IPP and
DMAPP are synthesized through two different routes that take
place in two distinct cellular compartments. The cytosolic pathway, also called MVA pathway, starts from acetyl-CoA and moves
through the intermediate mevalonate (MVA), providing the precursors for sterols, ubiquinone and sesquiterpenes [12]. An alternative pathway, called non-mevalonate pathway or MEP/DOXP
pathway, is located in the chloroplast. It implicates the condensation of pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate via 1-deoxy-Dxylulose 5-phosphate (DOXP) and 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4phosphate (MEP) and is used for the synthesis of isoprene, carotenoids, abscisic acid, and the side chains of chlorophylls and plastoquinone [29]. Although this subcellular compartmentation allows
both pathways to work independently, there are several evidences
that they can interact in some conditions [25,38,5]. Inhibition of
the cytosolic MVA pathway in A. thaliana leds to an increase of levels of carotenoids and chlorophylls, demonstrating that the decreased working of MVA pathway can be in part compensated for
by the MEP pathway. Inversely, inhibition of the MEP pathway in
seedlings causes the reduction of carotenoids and chlorophylls levels, indicating a predominantly unidirectional transport of isoprenoid intermediates from the chloroplast to the cytosol. In order to
investigate whether the transcriptional regulation is at the basis
of the crosstalk between the cytosolic and the plastidial pathways,
Laule et al. [25] studied this interaction by identifying the genes

901

with expression levels changed as a response to the inhibition.
They have shown that the inhibitor mediated changes in metabolite levels are not reﬂected in changes in gene expression levels,
suggesting that alterations in the ﬂux through the cytosolic and
plastidial pathways of isoprenoid metabolism are not transcriptionally regulated. In order to clarify the interaction between the
two pathways at the transcriptional level, Wille and Buhlmann
[48] have explored the structural relationship between genes on
the basis of their expression levels under different experimental
conditions. This study aimed to infer the regulatory network of
the genes in the isoprenoid pathways by incorporating the expression levels of 795 genes from other 56 metabolic pathways. Moving beyond the one-gene approach, the authors have found
various connections between genes in the two different pathways,
suggesting the existence of a crosstalk at the transcriptional level.
We applied the ‘2C method to the publicly available data set
from [48]. The data consisted of expression measurements for 39
genes in the isoprenoid pathways and 795 in other 56 pathways
assayed on 118 Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays. Among the 39
genes in the isoprenoid pathways, 15 are assigned to the cytosolic
pathway, 19 to the plastidal pathway and 5 encode mitochondrial
proteins involved in isoprenoid synthesis. We were interested in
the construction of a gene network related to the two isoprenoid
pathways considering also the effects of genes in the other pathways. To this end, we built 1000 bootstrap replications of the data
set and used 95% conﬁdence interval for inferring the network. The
Fig. 5 depicts the inferred network with 44 edges. For each pathway we found a module with strongly interconnected and positively correlated genes. This enlightens the reliability of our
method since genes within the same pathway are potentially
jointly regulated [42]. Furthermore, we identiﬁed two strong candidate genes for the cross-talk between both pathways: HMGS and
HDS. HMGS represents the hub of the cytosolic module since it is
positively correlated to ﬁve genes of the same pathway: DPPS1,
MDPC1, AACT2, HMGR2 and MK. It encodes a protein with hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase activity that catalyses the second
step of the MVA pathway. HDS represents the hub of the plastidial
module since it is positively correlated to ﬁve genes of the same

Fig. 5. Biological network of the isoprenoid pathways inferred by using ‘2C. Upper part: Genes of MVA pathway. Lower part: Genes of MEP/DOXP pathway. Grey boxes refer to
mithochondrial genes; HMGS and HDS represent the candidate hubs of the two modules.

902

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

pathway: DXPS1, MECPS, GGPPS12, IPPI1 and PPDS2. It encodes a
chloroplast-localized hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate synthase and catalyses the penultimate step of the biosynthesis of IPP and DMAPP via the MEP/DOXP pathway. The
negative correlation between HMGS and HDS suggests that they
respond differently to the tested experimental conditions. This, together with the high connectivity of the two hubs, provides an evidence of cross-talk between proteins in the plastidial and the
cytosolic pathways. Other negative correlations between the two
pathways are represented by the edges HMGR2jMECPS,
MPDC2jPPDS2 and MPDC2jDXPS2. Interestingly, the plastidial gene
IPPI1 is found to be positively correlated to the module of connected genes in the MVA pathway (IPPI1jMK, IPP1jIPPI2). This evidence conﬁrms the results of [19] where they guessed that the
enzyme IPPI1 controls the steady-state levels of IPP and DMAPP
in the chloroplast, when a high level of transfer of intermediates
between the two cell compartments takes place. Moreover, our
study showed three candidate mitochondrial genes for the crosstalk (DPPS2, GGPPS5 and UPPS1) which are in the plastidial module. Finally, it is interesting to note that the method used in [48]
and in [19] included more cross-links between the two pathways
with respect to the ‘2C method. Although it is known the existence
of cross-links between the two pathways, we believe that these
interactions should not be so numerous, as genes of the two pathways belong to two different cell compartments. A possible explanation of such a difference is that [48,19] constructed a network
based on ﬁrst-order conditional dependencies that are not able
to capture all multi-gene effects on a given pair of genes.

3.2.2. Interacting genes in HRAS signature
Ras genes represent a GTPase superfamily composed by more
than 150 distinct cellular members, among which the most representatives are HRAS, NRAS and KRAS. Up to 30% of all screened human tumors are found to carry some mutations in any of these
genes. Ras signal transduction proceeds through activation of some
signal transduction cascades, such that of Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases (MAPKs), and culminates in the modulation of transcription of speciﬁc genes involved in many physiological
processes including cell cycle progression, growth, migration, cytoskeletal changes, apoptosis, and senescence. The cross-talk among
this plethora of actors creates a molecular network whose balance
is crucial to determine normal cellular responses. Indeed, alterations of Ras signaling could break this balance and induce the onset
of cancer and for this reason the inference and the analysis of Ras
network is of fundamental importance [16].
In this context, we applied the ‘2C method for inferring genes directly interacting with HRAS. To this end, we used a data set with a
controlled genetic perturbation of HRAS used to generate its oncogenic signature [6]. Such a signature was identiﬁed by infection of
human primary mammary epithelial cell cultures (HMECs) with
adenoviruses expressing activated HRAS. The signature was composed of those 276 genes for which the expression levels were
mostly correlated with the classiﬁcation of HMEC samples into
HRAS-activated versus wild-type. The resulting data set used in
our experiment was composed of 276 genes assayed in 10 samples
relative to HRAS-activated and 10 samples relative to wild-type
HRAS. Indeed, we considered that the RAS signature retrieved by

Fig. 6. Biological network of the 34 genes interacting with HRAS inferred using ‘2C method. The gray shaded boxes indicate the genes sharing the RREB1 consensus binding
site.

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

Bild includes direct and indirect connections of the H-RAS gene
with the others and, consequently, we applied L2C method in order
to select only the direct interactions. Moreover, the conditional
dependences were evaluated conditioning over only the genes in
the signature because the study of Bild suggests that the interactions between the signature and the other genes on chip can be
neglected.
The selection of the graph was performed by building 1000
bootstrap replications of the data and computing the 99,5% conﬁdence interval of the statistics. The resulting network was composed of 2875 edges (see Additional ﬁle 4), where HRAS had 34
direct connections (Fig. 6).
We analyzed the 34 HRAS interacting genes with the TRANSFAC
component of GATHER [9] to assess the signiﬁcance of the presence of common potential transcription factor binding sites within
their promoters. A very interesting ﬁnding was that the list of these
34 genes was enriched of the RREB1 (Ras responsive element binding protein 1) module with a p-value < 0.0005. In fact, 9 of them
(see Fig. 6) presented the RREB1 consensus binding site. On the
contrary, the complete Ras signature did not exhibit enrichment
for this module. RREB1 is a zinc ﬁnger transcription factor ubiquitously expressed in human tissues that binds to RAS-responsive
elements (RREs) of gene promoters. Thiagalingam et al. [44] have
demonstrated that RREB1 plays a role in Ras and Raf signal transduction in medullary thyroid cancer. In particular, they have
shown that the binding of RREB1 to RRE of the calcitonin gene promoter during Ras- or Raf-induced differentiation increases expression of calcitonin in TT human medullary thyroid cancer cells. Our
hypothesis is that the 9 genes directly connected to HRAS are involved in the downstream signaling of Ras through RREB1. One
of them, EDG4, has been already found to be correlated to Ras signaling. EDG4 is the receptor for lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a lipid
growth factor and intracellular signaling molecule. It was demonstrated that the expression of a mutated form of Ras GTPase
blocked LPA-induced cell migration [35]. This preliminary result
suggests that our method is able to enlighten putative regulatory
interactions that should be biochemically validated.

4. Conclusions
In the last few years many studies have highlighted the importance of analyzing direct as well as indirect interactions among
genes and proteins for unveiling their roles in the onset and progression of complex and multifactorial diseases like tumors. This
type of approach is alternative to the classical studies which address the problem of analyzing the association between genes
and pathways with the phenotype [1,43]. To this end, many methods have been recently developed to infer gene regulatory networks by using gene expression data [4] in order to reveal
putative dependencies among genes and their products. In this paper, we present a comparative study of three different methods to
infer networks of conditional dependencies by estimating partial
correlation coefﬁcients in the typical situation when the number
of observations n is small respect to the number p of variables.
The methods and the procedures exploited for their comparison
have been developed in the general frameworks of statistical learning theory and regularization theory [46], which constitute stateof-the-art approaches for the analysis and interpretation of data
sets composed of a huge number of variables when only a few
number of observations is available.
Methods which exploit partial correlation estimates for inferring gene regulatory networks from expression data offer a number
of advantages with respect to methods based on mutual information (see for example [33]. In particular, although these methods
provide a natural generalization of correlation since they take into

903

account also non-linear dependences between variables, they are
not able to assess conditional dependences between two variables
in the case the number of conditioning variables is huge as in the
context of gene regulatory networks [41].
In our simulation study, we limited our attention to methods
which embody an L2 regularization term in their analytical formulation. Such methods, in general, offer more stable solutions with
respect to Lasso methods which incorporate L1 regularization
terms [27]. The main disadvantage of the adopted techniques for
inferring conditional dependency graphs is that they provide
non-sparse solutions. To circumvent this problem we have adopted
a bootstrap technique which is able to reveal the conditional
dependency between two variables with a given statistical
signiﬁcance.
The three analyzed methods were compared through an extensive and biologically inspired simulation study. This choice was
adopted because the lack of a validated ground truth relative to
biological networks prevents to compare methods by using real
gene expression data. In particular, the need of simulated data
arises from imperfect knowledge of real networks in cells, from
the lack of suitable gene expression datasets, and of control of
noise levels. In silico data enable one to check the performance
of algorithm against a perfectly known ground truth [4].
Different measures were adopted for assessing the performances of the analyzed methods. Although we did not ﬁnd a method which consistently outperformed the others in all the carried
out simulations, we found that the ‘2C method provided the most
predictive partial correlation estimates, as highlighted by the
AUC analysis. More importantly, this method had the highest values of sensitivity showing its ability to infer true conditional
dependencies between variables also when a few number of observations is available. Our study has shown that the ‘2C method is
well suited for revealing conditional dependencies when the number of really conditioning variables is small if compared to p as in
the case of genomic data.
The application of this method to real biological contexts allowed to infer gene networks with some known regulatory signals.
In particular, it revealed a negative signiﬁcant correlation between
the expressions of HMGS and HDS, that we found to be the two
hubs in the two isoprenoid pathways in A. thaliana.
This means that they respond differently to the several tested
experimental conditions and, together with the high connectivity
of the two hubs, provides an evidence of cross-talk between genes
in the plastidial and the cytosolic pathways. This evidence did not
result from studies at level of single gene. Moreover, studies that
infer this network by using only low-order partial correlation coefﬁcients ﬁnd more interactions between the two pathways with respect to the ‘2C method. A reduced number of edges between the
two pathways is plausible considering the different cell compartmentalization of the two isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways.
Moreover, the application of this method to a signature of HRAS
oncogene permitted to reveal the presence of nine genes connected
to HRAS, sharing the same Ras-responsive binding site for the transcription factor RREB1. This result suggests that the transcriptional
activation of these genes is mediated by a common transcription
factor downstream of Ras signaling.
In conclusion, our study has shown that the ‘2C method is able
to infer GRNs with relevant putative interactions and to provide
interesting biological hypotheses that should be biochemically
validated.

Author’s contributions
NA, PFS, SM and FPS conceived the study. PFS, TMC and RA designed the algorithms and conduced the experiments; VCL ana-

904

P.F. Stifanelli et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46 (2013) 894–904

lyzed the results from a biological point of view and, together with
SM and NA they evaluated and compared the experimental results.
All the authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank Arturo Argentieri for his valuable technical support.
This work has been supported in part by Grants from Regione Puglia PO FESR 2007–2013 Progetto BISIMANE (Cod. n. 44), Progetto
FIRB RBAP11B2SX, Progetto di Ricerca Finalizzata 2009 RF/20091471624.

Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.07.002.
References
[1] Abatangelo L, Maglietta R, Distaso A, D’Addabbo A, Creanza TM, Mukherjee S,
et al. Comparative study of gene set enrichment methods. BMC Bioinform
2009;10:275.
[2] Ancona N, Maglietta R, D’Addabbo A, Liuni S, Pesole G. Regularized least
squares cancer classiﬁers from dna microarray data. BMC Bioinform 2005;6:S2.
[3] Anderson TW. An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis. Wiley series
in probability and statistics. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2003.
[4] Bansal M, Belcastro V, Ambesi-Impiombato A, di Bernardo D. How to infer gene
networks from expression proﬁles. Mol Syst Biol 2007;3:78.
[5] Bick JA, Lange BM. Metabolic cross talk between cytosolic and plastidial
pathways of isoprenoid biosynthesis: unidirectional transport of intermediates
across the chloroplast envelope membrane. Arch Biochem Biophys
2003;415:146–54.
[6] Bild A, Yao G, Chang J, Wang Q, Potti A, Chasse D, et al. Oncogenic pathway
signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted therapies. Nature
2006;439:353–7.
[7] Butte AJ, Tamayo P, Slonim D, Golub TR, Kohane IS. Discovering functional
relationships between rna expression and chemotherapeutic susceptibility
using relevance networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:12182–6.
[8] Castelo R, Roverato A. A robust procedure for gaussian graphical model search
from microarray data with p larger than n. J Mach Learn Res 2006;7:2621–50.
[9] Chang J, Nevins J. Gather: a systems approach to interpreting genomic
signatures. Bioinformatics 2006;22:2926–33.
[10] Dempster AP. Covariance selection. Biometrics 1972;28:157–75.
[11] Dikstra RL. Establishing the positive deﬁniteness of the sample covariance
matrix. Ann Math Statist 1970;41:2153–4.
[12] Disch A, Hemmerlin A, Bach TJ, Rohmer M. Mevalonate-derived isopentenyl
diphosphate is the biosynthetic precursor of ubiquinone prenyl side chain in
tobacco by-2 cells. Biochem J 1998;331:615–21.
[13] Dobra A, Hans C, Jones B, Nevins JR, West M. Sparse graphical models for
exploring gene expression data. J Multiv Anal 2004;90:196–212.
[14] Edwards D. Introduction to graphical modelling. New York: Springer-Verlag;
1995.
[15] Fawcett T. An introduction to roc analysis. Pattern Recogn Lett
2006;27:861–74.
[16] Fernandez-Medarde A, Santos E. Ras in cancer and developmental disease.
Genes Cancer 2011;2:344–58.
[17] Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Sparse inverse covariance estimation with
the graphical lasso. Biostatistics 2008;9:432–41.
[18] Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Application of the lasso and grouped lasso to
the estimation of sparse graphical models 2010. http://wwwstat.stanford.edu/tibs/ftp/ggraph.pdf.
[19] Gilbert H, van der Laan M, Dudoit S. Joint multiple testing procedures for
graphical model selection with applications to biological networks. U.C.
Berkeley Division of Biostatistics Working Paper Series 245; 2009.
[20] Girosi F, Jones M, Poggio T. Regularization theory and neural networks
architectures. Neural Comput 1995;7:219–69.

[21] Harborne JB. Recent advances in the ecological chemistry of plant terpenoids.
In: Harborne JB, Tomas-Barberan RA, editors. Ecological chemistry and
biochemistry of plant terpenoids. Oxford: Clarendon; 1991.
[22] Hollander M, Wolfe DA. Nonparametric statistical methods. Wiley series in
probability and statistics. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1999.
[23] Kitano H. Systems biology: a brief overview. Science 2002;295:1662–4.
[24] Lange BM, Rujan T, Martin W, Croteau R. Isoprenoid biosynthesis: the
evolution of two ancient and distinct pathways across genomes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000;97:13172–7.
[25] Laule O, Frholz A, Chang HS, Zhu T, Wang X, Heifetz PB, et al. Crosstalk between
cytosolic and plastidial pathways of isoprenoid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:6866–71.
[26] Lauritzen SL. Graphical models. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996.
[27] Leng C, Lin Y, Wahba G. A note on lasso and related procedures in model
selection. Stat Sinica 2006;16:1273–84.
[28] Li J, Hua X, Haubrock M, Wang J, Wingender E. The architecture of the gene
regulatory networks of different tissues. Bioinformatics 2012;28:i509–14.
[29] Lichtenthaler HK, Schwender J, Disch A, Rohmer M. Biosynthesis of isoprenoids
in higher plant chloroplasts proceeds via a mevalonate-independent pathway.
FEBS Lett 1997;400:271–4.
[30] Luntz A, Brailovsky V. On estimation of characters obtained in statistical
procedure of recognition. Techn Kibernet 1969;3.
[31] Madhamshettiwar P, Maetschke S, Davis M, Reverter A, Ragan M. Gene
regulatory network inference: evaluation and application to ovarian cancer
allows the prioritization of drug targets. Genome Med 2012;4:41.
[32] Mansmann U, Jurinovic V. Biological feature validation of estimated gene
interaction networks from microarray data: a case study on myc in
lymphomas. Brief Bioinform 2011;12:230–44.
[33] Margolin A, Nemenman I, Basso K, Wiggins C, Stolovitzky G, Favera R, et al.
Aracne: an algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a
mammalian cellular context. BMC Bioinform 2006;7:S7.
[34] Meinshausen N, Buhlmann P. High-dimensional graphs and variable selection
with the lasso. Ann Stat 2006;34:1436–62.
[35] Park S, Schinkmann K, Avraham S. Raftk/pyk2 mediates lpa-induced pc12 cell
migration. Cell Signal 2006;18:1063–71.
[36] Peng J, Wang P, Zhou N, Zhu J. Partial correlation estimation by joint sparse
regression models. J Am Stat Assoc 2009;104:735–46.
[37] Raudys S, Duin RPW. Expected classiﬁcation error of the ﬁsher linear classiﬁer
with pseudoinverse covariance matrix. Pattern Recogn Lett 1998;19:385–92.
[38] Rodriguez-Concepcion M, Fores O, Martinez-Garcia JF, Gonzalez V, Phillips M,
Ferrer A, et al. Distinct light-mediated pathways regulate the biosynthesis and
exchange of isoprenoid precursors during arabidopsis seedling development.
Plant Cell 2004;16:144–56.
[39] Schäfer J, Strimmer K. An empirical bayes approach to inferring large-scale
gene association networks. Bioinformatics 2005;21:754–64.
[40] Simon N, Tibshirani R. A permutation approach to testing interactions in many
dimensions. arXiv:1206.6519 [stat.ML].
[41] Soranzo N, Bianconi G, Altaﬁni C. Comparing association network algorithms
for reverse engineering of large-scale gene regulatory networks: synthetic
versus real data. Bioinformatics 2007;23:13:1640–7.
[42] Stuart JM, Segal E, Koller D, Kim SK. A gene-coexpression network for global
discovery of conserved genetic modules. Science 2003;302:249–55.
[43] Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA,
et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for
interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc Natl Acad Sci
2005;102:15545–50.
[44] Thiagalingam A, De Bustros A, Borges M, Jasti R, Compton D, Diamond L, et al.
is involved in the differentiation response to ras in human medullary thyroid
carcinomas. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:5335–53045.
[45] Toh H, Horimoto K. System for automatically inferring a genetic network from
expression proﬁles. J Biol Phys 2002;28:449–64.
[46] Vapnik V. Statistical learning theory. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1998.
[47] Whittaker J. Graphical models in applied multivariate statistics. New
York: John Wiley & Sons; 1990.
[48] Wille A, Buhlmann P. Sparse graphical gaussian modelling of the isoprenoid
network in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Biol 2004;5:R92.
[49] Witten DM, Tibshirani R. Covariance-regularized regression and classiﬁcation
for high dimensional problems. J R Stat Soc B 2009;71:615–36.
[50] Yuan M, Lin Y. Model selection and estimation in the gaussian graphical
model. Biometrika 2007;94:19–35.
[51] Zhang B, Li H, Riggins R, Zhan M, Xuan J, Zhang Z, et al. Differential dependency
network analysis to identify condition-speciﬁc topological changes in
biological networks. Bioinformatics 2009;4:526–32.

