Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

Abstraction of complex concepts with a reﬁned partial-area taxonomy of SNOMED
Yue Wang a, Michael Halper b,⇑, Duo Wei c, Yehoshua Perl a, James Geller a
a

Computer Science Dept., New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
Information Technology Dept., New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
c
Computer Science and Information Systems, School of Business, The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, Galloway, NJ 08205 USA
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 June 2010
Accepted 23 August 2011
Available online 25 August 2011
Keywords:
SNOMED
Terminology
Partitioning
Abstraction network
Modeling
Taxonomy

a b s t r a c t
An algorithmically-derived abstraction network, called the partial-area taxonomy, for a SNOMED hierarchy has led to the identiﬁcation of concepts considered complex. The designation ‘‘complex’’ is arrived at
automatically on the basis of structural analyses of overlap among the constituent concept groups of the
partial-area taxonomy. Such complex concepts, called overlapping concepts, constitute a tangled portion
of a hierarchy and can be obstacles to users trying to gain an understanding of the hierarchy’s content. A
new methodology for partitioning the entire collection of overlapping concepts into singly-rooted groups,
that are more manageable to work with and comprehend, is presented. Different kinds of overlapping
concepts with varying degrees of complexity are identiﬁed. This leads to an abstract model of the overlapping concepts called the disjoint partial-area taxonomy, which serves as a vehicle for enhanced, highlevel display. The methodology is demonstrated with an application to SNOMED’s Specimen hierarchy.
Overall, the resulting disjoint partial-area taxonomy offers a reﬁned view of the hierarchy’s structural
organization and conceptual content that can aid users, such as maintenance personnel, working with
SNOMED. The utility of the disjoint partial-area taxonomy as the basis for a SNOMED auditing regimen
is presented in a companion paper.
 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
SNOMED CT [1] has proven to be an important resource to the
healthcare and biomedical community since its origination in
2002. However, its expanding size (295,000 concepts designated
as ‘‘current’’ in the July 2011 release) and inherent complexity
may hinder its usability and further deployment. Advanced tools
for the display of aspects of SNOMED’s conceptual content—facilitating orientation and comprehension—are needed.
In previous work, we have devised high-level abstraction networks based on analyses of a SNOMED hierarchy’s attribute relationships and their patterns of inheritance [2]. A hierarchy’s
concepts were partitioned into groups, called areas, according to
their speciﬁc attribute relationships. From this partition, an
abstraction network, referred to as the area taxonomy, affording a
summary view of the distribution of the attribute relationships
was constructed. Further reﬁnement of areas led to another
abstraction network, the partial-area taxonomy, which conveyed
information about sub-area hierarchical arrangements. In addition
to their support for orientation to and comprehension of a
⇑ Corresponding author. Fax: +1 973 596 5324.
E-mail addresses: yw44@njit.edu (Y. Wang), mikehhalper@yahoo.com (M.
Halper), Duo.Wei@stockton.edu (D. Wei), yehoshua.perl@gmail.com (Y. Perl),
james.geller@gmail.com (J. Geller).
1532-0464/$ - see front matter  2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.08.013

SNOMED hierarchy, the two networks have served as the bases
of our formulation of structural methodologies for auditing
SNOMED hierarchies [2]. Importantly, we found that many concept
errors manifested themselves as structural anomalies at the taxonomy level, and thus the taxonomies proved to be effective building
blocks for automated auditing regimens.
In this work, we further extend the taxonomy paradigm to overcome some deﬁciencies in the framework in dealing with particularly complex portions of a SNOMED hierarchy. A recurring theme
of our previous terminological analyses has been that complex concepts—characterized by various structural features—are often
obstacles to orientation and comprehension efforts and usually
are natural places to look for modeling errors. Of course, there are
numerous ways, in different contexts, to qualify the notion of ‘‘complex.’’ We have typically used the idea that concepts are complex
when they simultaneously belong to multiple groups along some
given categorizing dimension. In the context of SNOMED auditing,
concepts appearing in regions of the partial-area taxonomy characterized by the convergence of multiple ancestral inheritance paths
were deemed to be complex and given auditing priority [3].
In this paper, we focus on another variety of complex concepts,
where again a structural feature (relatively easily computed) is
being used to determine ‘‘complex.’’ In this case, the structural
feature is set overlap, and the concepts are those that reside in
overlapping portions of two or more sub-area groupings called

16

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

partial-areas. As it happens, the entire collection of these
overlapping concepts may constitute a highly tangled subhierarchy. We wish to impose some order on such a subhierarchy to
facilitate orientation and comprehension for various users. In particular, we present an automated methodology for partitioning the
entire set of overlapping concepts to form what we refer to as a disjoint partial-area taxonomy, an abstraction network that captures
the prevailing hierarchical conﬁguration of the overlaps. Through
this taxonomy, the user is presented with a view showing the gestalt of the overlaps, allowing for easier comprehension of their
content.
One class of user, in particular, that can beneﬁt from the reﬁned,
high-level display offered by the new abstraction network is the
domain-expert auditor. In the current paper, we present the details
of the abstraction network and its derivation. An enhanced auditing regimen based on this network and the overlapping concepts
is expounded in a companion paper [4].
2. Background
2.1. SNOMED CT
SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical
Terms) [1], formed through the merger of SNOMED RT (Reference
Terminology) and the UK’s CTV3 (Clinical Terms Version 3), is a
description-logic-based (DL-based) medical terminology covering
a wide range of clinical concepts, including diseases, clinical ﬁndings, procedures, specimens, substances, etc. In this paper, we are
using the inferred (distributed) view of SNOMED CT as opposed
to its stated view expressed in its native DL language [5].
Each SNOMED1 concept has a unique descriptive term, called its
‘‘fully speciﬁed name’’ (FSN), a preferred term, and, typically, a set
of synonyms. Concepts are organized in 19 top-level, singly-rooted
hierarchies to capture broad, clinically-related groupings, such as
Clinical Finding, Substance, Body Structure, and so on. Concepts within one hierarchy are linked by IS-A (subsumption) relationships in
such a way that each hierarchy forms a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
Concepts also have attribute relationships directed to other concepts. These attribute relationships (relationships, for short) serve
in deﬁnitional capacities. For example, the concept Ear problem
(in the Clinical Finding hierarchy) has the relationship ﬁnding site2
to the concept Ear structure (in the Body Structure hierarchy) specifying that Ear structure is the site of Ear problem. In SNOMED, each
kind of relationship is deﬁned to span from a source hierarchy to a
target hierarchy (perhaps more than one). For example, ﬁve kinds
of relationships, namely, specimen substance, specimen procedure,
specimen source morphology, specimen source topography, and specimen source identity, are deﬁned with the Specimen hierarchy as their
source hierarchy.3 The respective target hierarchies of the ﬁrst four
are Substance, Procedure, Body Structure, and Body Structure. The
relationship identity has four target hierarchies itself: Social Context,
Physical Object, Qualiﬁer Value, and Environment or Geographical
Location.
2.2. Area and partial-area taxonomies
In previous work, we have carried out structural analyses of
SNOMED hierarchies yielding two types of high-level abstraction
networks: the area taxonomy and the partial-area taxonomy [2].
Each serves to capture the relationship distribution within a hier1

From now on, we will drop the ‘‘CT’’.
Concept names are written in italics with the ﬁrst letter capitalized; relationships
are in italics.
3
For brevity, we will use just the last word of each relationship name in the
remainder of the paper.
2

archy from a high-level perspective. Both networks are derived
based on the respective relationships exhibited by the concepts
in the hierarchy. The latter network reﬁnes the former by including
additional hierarchical grouping knowledge. In the following, we
present the important details pertaining to these two networks.
The basis of the area taxonomy is a partition of the concepts
into what we call areas according to their sets of (non-hierarchical)
relationships. An area is deﬁned as the complete set of concepts
having exactly the same given set of relationships, irrespective of
the targets of those relationships for the particular concepts. Formally, let {r1, r2, . . . , rn} be a set of relationships. The area deﬁned
with respect to this set of relationships is as follows, where relshps(C) is the entire set of relationships exhibited by the concept C:

Areaðfr 1 ; r 2 ; . . . ; rn gÞ ¼ fC j relshpsðCÞ ¼ fr 1 ; r 2 ; . . . ; r n gg

ð1Þ

Given the fact that an area is deﬁned by its set of relationships,
we denote it as ‘‘{r1, r2, . . . , rn}.’’ If a given combination of relationships does not exist (i.e., the set deﬁned in (1) is empty), then
the area is excluded from analysis and is deemed not to exist. As
an example, in the context of the Specimen hierarchy, there are
380 concepts that have the relationships procedure and topography
(and only those relationships). Examples include the concepts Ear
swab sample, Specimen from thymus gland obtained by biopsy, and
Cervical biopsy sample. Therefore, there is an area named {topography, procedure} in the Specimen hierarchy. Areas are by deﬁnition
disjoint, i.e., each concept belongs to one and only one area, and
they therefore provide a partition of the hierarchy.
The area taxonomy is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) constructed by making each area a node and then arranging them hierarchically—analogously to the underlying concepts—using what
we refer to as child-of relationships as edges. The child-of’s are derived from the concepts’ IS-A links. Before we describe how this is
done, we need to deﬁne the notion of a root of an area. Let area(C)
be the area of concept C, and let parents(C) denote the set of parents of C in the IS-A hierarchy.
Deﬁnition. (Root of an Area): A concept O in area A is a root of A if
"C 2 parents(O), area(C) – area(O).
That is, a root is a concept whose parents all reside in other areas,
or, in other words, its set of relationships is different from all its parents’. A root is not unique; an area can have more than one of them.
Let us note that a root is of considerable signiﬁcance in the makeup
of a SNOMED hierarchy because, from a top-down hierarchical perspective, it is the ﬁrst concept with a given combination of relationships. In this sense, it constitutes a cornerstone in the successive
build-up of knowledge that is a conceptual hierarchy.
A child-of link in the area taxonomy is derived as follows. Let A
and B be two areas such that a root of A has a parent in B. Then
there exists a child-of from A to B. Overall, the collection of area
nodes and child-of edges forms a DAG.
The area taxonomy of the 1056-concept Specimen hierarchy
(July ’07 release) has a total of 24 areas distributed over ﬁve levels
(Fig. 1). The boxes are the areas and the edges (directed upward)
are the child-of’s. It should be noted that the top-level area ;
(‘‘empty set’’) comprises all concepts having no relationships at
all. Thus, it has been given the name ‘‘;’’ to indicate an empty set
of relationships. Note that the color-coded levels of the area taxonomy distinguish the numbers of relationships of the areas. The area
; is on Level 0 and has zero relationships. The ﬁve green rectangles
on Level 1 are the areas having exactly one relationship each.
The partial-area taxonomy is designed in an effort to achieve
hierarchical coherence in addition to the structural congruity of
each of the areas. The network is a reﬁnement of the area taxonomy. As noted, areas may have more than one root. In such a case,
each root and its respective collection of descendants (within the

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

17

Fig. 1. Area taxonomy for SNOMED’s Specimen hierarchy (July 2007). The nodes (boxes) are the areas, and the lines are the child-of relationships.

area) can be seen as being a distinct unit of subject matter that has
the same set of relationships as some other such units. Moreover,
that unit of knowledge is hierarchically coherent due to the single
root. All concepts in the unit are specializations of the single root.
With this in mind, we deﬁne the notion of partial-area with respect
to a root O. In the following, desc(X, Y) denotes the fact that concept
X is a descendant of concept Y in the IS-A hierarchy.

Partial-AreaðOÞ ¼ fOg [ fC j C 2 areaðOÞ and descðC; OÞg

ð2Þ

That is, the partial-area is a subset of the area consisting of the root
O and all its descendants in the area. The partial-area deﬁned by (2)
is named ‘‘O’’ after its constituent root, since it is the deﬁning
characteristic.
The partial-areas are drawn as separate nodes in the partialarea taxonomy embedded inside their area nodes, which are retained. The partial-area nodes within a given area are not connected via child-of links. However, partial-areas residing in
different areas are connected by child-of’s in a manner analogous
to that for areas. In the complete partial-area taxonomy, the
child-of’s between areas are replaced by those between their partial-areas. However, we often use certain abbreviation conventions
or abridgment to reduce clutter. See [2] for details.
Fig. 2 shows the (abridged) partial-area taxonomy of the Specimen hierarchy. Each partial-area appears as a box inside its area
node. In each partial-area node, the number in parentheses is the
number of concepts it contains. For example, we see that the area
{identity} (second lower green box from left) has two partial-areas,
Device specimen and Specimen from patient, of 19 and two concepts,
respectively. All 19 concepts of the partial-area Device specimen
represent specimens from devices. The partial-area taxonomy has
a total of 361 partial-areas. An example child-of can be seen on
the left side of the ﬁgure extending from partial-area Effusion sample to Body substance sample. Many child-of’s have been omitted.

Note that in some areas in Fig. 2, the numbers of concepts in the
partial-areas do not add up to the total number of concepts in the
area in Fig. 1. As a matter of fact, the area {substance} only contains
81 concepts, while the sum of concept numbers appearing in
parentheses of its partial-areas is 136. This is due to overlaps
among partial-areas, an issue we will deal with in detail in this
paper.
In [6], the taxonomy framework was extended to hierarchies
having no outgoing relationships by utilizing implicit converse
relationships. The connection between auditing and complexity
measures expressed with the taxonomy framework was explored
in [7].
2.3. Terminology abstraction networks and automatic suspiciousconcept identiﬁcation
Due to the typically limited availability of resources for auditing, it is important to focus efforts on concepts or groups of concepts where those efforts are most likely to be needed. In this
way, a better return, measured in the number of errors found,
can be expected for a given amount of auditing work. Therefore,
it is essential that research on terminology auditing develop techniques for automatically identifying concepts expected to have errors at a higher rate.
We have proposed and implemented SNOMED auditing regimens that make use of the two programmatically derived taxonomies introduced above [2,3]. We have shown that the taxonomies
are extremely helpful in promoting more efﬁcient and effective
auditing. Different kinds of concept errors have been found to
manifest themselves as anomalies at the taxonomy level, allowing
for efﬁcient discovery. The auditing methodology presented in the
companion paper [4] is based on additional reﬁnements to the partial-area taxonomy introduced herein.

18

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

Fig. 2. Partial-area taxonomy (abridged) for the Specimen hierarchy (July 2007). The main boxes are the areas, and the lines are the child-of relationships. The embedded
boxes are the partial-areas.

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

19

Fig. 3. The overlapping concept Blood bag specimen, from patient resides in two partial-areas, Device specimen and Specimen from patient, demarcated by the dashed bubbles.

Similar utilization of abstraction-network anomalies for the
identiﬁcation of suspicious concepts (i.e., those that are likely erroneous) has been done with other terminologies as well. Partialarea taxonomies were used for this purpose in the context of the
National Cancer Institute thesaurus (NCIt) where partial-areas containing only a few concepts often held erroneous ones [8]. For the
UMLS, inconsistencies between hierarchical relationships involving concepts and the corresponding relationships involving their
semantic types in the Semantic Network have been used as an
effective means of identifying suspicious concepts, particularly
those having incorrect relationships and type assignments [9–
12]. The Reﬁned Semantic Network [13] for the UMLS supports this
effort as well through the use of its ‘‘intersection semantic types’’
when they contain a minimal number of concepts [14,15].
3. Methods
The partial-area taxonomy has proven to be a useful vehicle for
comprehending the overall structure of a SNOMED hierarchy,
locating potential errors within it, and identifying modeling aspects that can be improved [2,3]. However, the taxonomy does lack
a characteristic we call semantic uniformity that we have found useful in the realms of both comprehension and auditing. This deﬁciency is due to the potential overlap between partial-areas that
was alluded to above. Let us look at an example to demonstrate
this. The area {identity} has two roots, Device specimen and Specimen from patient (see Fig. 2). Device specimen and its 18 descendants (including Blood bag specimen) form one partial-area.
Specimen from patient and its child Blood bag specimen, from patient
form another. Blood bag specimen, from patient also happens to be a
child of Blood bag specimen. Thus, Blood bag specimen, from patient
is in two partial-areas: Device specimen and Specimen from patient.
This situation is illustrated in Fig. 3. We say that these two partialareas Device specimen and Specimen from patient ‘‘overlap’’ and call
the concept Blood bag specimen, from patient an ‘‘overlapping concept.’’ The entire set of overlapping concepts is denoted V.

This raises two important issues. First, the entire collection of
partial-areas does not form a partition of the hierarchy. This is in
contrast to the collection of areas which does. Second, when two
partial-areas overlap, some concepts in a partial-area, like the concept Blood bag specimen, elaborate only the semantics of one root
(i.e., Device specimen) while the overlapping concepts in that same
partial-area, in this case, the concept Blood bag specimen, from patient, elaborate the semantics of two roots (i.e., Device specimen and
Specimen from patient). The situation gets worse when we have
three overlapping partial-areas, say, R1, R2, and R3. In this situation,
some concepts in R1 are elaborating the semantics of the root R1,
while others may be elaborating the semantics of the two roots
R1 and R2, and others are elaborating the semantics of all three
roots R1, R2, and R3. In this sense, the partial-area R1 is not semantically uniform with respect to its root.
This deﬁciency of the partial-area taxonomy actually presents
us with opportunities that we avail ourselves of in this paper and
a companion paper [4]. One is the fact that the overlapping concepts lend themselves nicely to auditing scrutiny. Such concepts
elaborate the semantics of two or more signiﬁcant root concepts
in the hierarchy and thus warrant the designation ‘‘complex concept,’’ which underpins an auditing methodology that we are introducing in [4].
The second opportunity pertains to the reﬁnement of the partial-area taxonomy. We will extend its theoretical underpinning
and reﬁne it to further facilitate comprehending the terminology
as well as the job of an auditor. In particular, we wish to partition
the overlapping concepts systematically such that each resulting
group of concepts is singly-rooted. The single root of each such
group will provide a uniform semantics for the whole group. This
is important because, as we will see, the overlapping concepts
can collectively constitute quite a tangled hierarchy. The partition
paves the way for the formation of an enhanced partial-area
taxonomy that provides a view of the prevailing hierarchical
conﬁguration of the overlapping concepts. This will aid the
subject-domain-expert editor and user in seeing the gestalt of

20

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

Fig. 4. The overlapping concepts Body ﬂuid sample and Acellular blood (serum or plasma) specimen (shaded) in the area {substance}.

the partial-area overlaps and more easily comprehending their
content. Furthermore, such enhanced comprehension will enable
an auditor to recognize any troublesome aspects. In this context,
a new auditing methodology is proposed in the companion paper
[4].
In the remainder of this section, we ﬁrst discuss further the issue of the complexity of overlapping concepts. After that, we devise a singly-rooted partitioning scheme for the overlapping
concepts of an area. This begins with the deﬁnition of what we call
overlapping roots. From the partition, we are able to deﬁne a new
reﬁned abstraction network for the concepts of a SNOMED hierarchy. This reﬁned abstraction network will better support comprehension of a SNOMED hierarchy by maintenance personnel,
including editors and auditors, by providing a disjoint partition

of the hierarchy’s concepts—the overlapping concepts, among
them—into semantically uniform groups. It will also form the basis
for an enhanced auditing regimen for the overlapping concepts of
such a hierarchy [4].
3.1. Overlapping concepts are complex concepts
To further motivate the focus on overlapping concepts and see
their inherent complexity, let us look at some examples. In the area
{substance} (Fig. 2), the three direct children, Body substance
sample, Fluid sample, and Drug specimen, of the top-level concept
Specimen induce three partial-areas, respectively. Fig. 4 shows
the three root concepts, along with two of their descendants
(shaded). The partial-areas are demarcated with dashed bubbles,

Fig. 5. Differing degrees of complexity for overlapping concepts in the area {substance}. The green overlapping concepts are more complex than the orange overlapping
concept which is more complex than the yellow overlapping concepts.

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

where the different border styles denote the different partial-areas.
Body ﬂuid sample, being a child of both Body substance sample and
Fluid sample, resides in the intersection of the two partial-areas. It
inherits the relationship substance directed to Body ﬂuid in the Substance hierarchy from both its parents.
The other shaded concept in Fig. 4, Acellular blood (serum or
plasma) specimen, sits in the intersection of the partial-areas Fluid
sample and Drug specimen. Thus, it elaborates the semantics of both
parents, and inherits the relationship substance and the accompanying targets. Different from the previous example, Acellular blood
(serum or plasma) specimen has two occurrences of the substance
relationship, one pointing at Liquid substance and the other pointing at Blood component, a descendant of Drug or medicament, the
target of the relationship substance of Drug specimen.
Overall, the area {substance} (Fig. 2) contains ten partial-areas
and has quite a few overlapping concepts. This can be gathered
from the fact that the sum of the numbers of concepts in its partial-areas (136) is much higher than the actual number of concepts
in the area (81). The increased complexity of overlapping concepts
is a consequence of the fact that they represent combination specializations deriving from multiple root concepts. For example,
Body ﬂuid sample and all its descendants residing in {substance}
are overlapping concepts belonging to the partial-areas Body substance sample and Fluid sample. All these concepts that are both
body substance and ﬂuid examples, e.g., Amniotic ﬂuid specimen
and Lymph sample, are inherently more complex than concepts that
are solely ﬂuid samples, e.g., Water specimen, or only body substance samples, e.g., Calculus specimen. They each elaborate the
semantics of a dual specialization.
The amount of overlapping, and attendant complexity, may increase as we traverse downward along the IS-A hierarchy. In {substance}, we ﬁnd 15 concepts belonging to exactly two partial-areas,
and 20 concepts belonging to three partial-areas. From this, we get
its actual number of concepts: 136  (2  1)  15  (3  1)  20 = 81.
Differing degrees of complexity are seen for the overlapping
concepts in Fig. 5, which contains a small fragment of the Specimen
hierarchy consisting of nine concepts from the area {substance}
(along with the hierarchy’s root). The three bubbles with different
border styles enclose three partial-areas. Their roots are children of
Specimen. All concepts below the roots (in colors) are overlapping
concepts. The ﬁrst of these are the yellow concepts Body ﬂuid sample and Acellular blood (serum or plasma) specimen. As we traverse
downward along the IS-A hierarchy, we ﬁnd examples of overlapping concepts that are even more complex. For example, one of the
children of the overlapping concept Body ﬂuid sample, Blood specimen (in orange), has another parent Drug specimen that is the root
of its partial-area. In this case, Blood specimen is the specialization
of three roots and thus resides in the intersection of three separate
partial-areas. But from the complexity point of view, it is a child of
one overlapping concept and one root of a partial-area. Hence, it is
more complex than the two yellow overlapping concepts that are
children of roots of partial-areas. Other—more complex—cases
can be seen with the green concepts, Serum specimen and Serum
specimen from blood product, each having two parents that are
overlapping concepts themselves. Let us note that a move down
the hierarchy does not necessarily imply an increase in complexity.
This is illustrated by Amniotic ﬂuid sample, whose only parent is
Body ﬂuid sample. Being singly parented, it does not lie at a significant knowledge convergence point and is thus considered no more
complex than Body ﬂuid sample from a structural standpoint.
3.2. Foundations of the partition: overlapping roots
As discussed, the portion of an area consisting of the overlapping concepts may constitute a highly tangled hierarchy. Our goal
is to impose some order on it by partitioning it in such a way as to

21

obtain a collection of concept groups exhibiting semantic uniformity by satisfying single-rootedness and no overlaps. Thus, our
ﬁrst task is to identify those overlapping concepts that will serve
as the roots of the concept groups. We will call them overlapping
roots. Just like the root of a partial-area, an overlapping root will
capture the overarching semantics of its group of overlapping concepts. The grouping process that we introduce proceeds in a deeply
nested (recursive) fashion.
We will actually deﬁne two kinds of overlapping roots: those at
the true ‘‘tops’’ of the overlapping portions of the partial-areas and
those residing beneath them—perhaps quite deep in the overlap.
Let us ﬁrst deﬁne the fundamental kind of overlapping root called
a base overlapping root, where, again, V is the entire set of overlapping concepts.
Deﬁnition. (Base Overlapping Root): A concept L 2 V is a base
overlapping root if "C 2 parents(L), C R V.
We have shown examples of overlapping concepts in Fig. 5.
Among them, for instance, Body ﬂuid sample is a base overlapping
root because both of its parents, Body substance sample and Fluid
sample, are non-overlapping concepts. They are, in fact, partial-area
roots. Another example is Acellular blood (serum or plasma) specimen with the non-overlapping parents Fluid sample and Drug
specimen.
In the progressive build-up of knowledge that is a concept hierarchy, the signiﬁcance of a base overlapping root is that it lies at
the conﬂuence of multiple independent lines of knowledge—originating from the roots of the area. In this sense, such a concept can
be seen as denoting a change of conceptual context within the
hierarchy as one moves downward. The roots of a partial-area
are signiﬁcant in terms of unique sets of relationships. The base
overlapping roots do not differ from their partial-area roots in regard to their relationships (they have the same relationships, in
fact), but each one does represent a new combination in the downward direction of individual knowledge artifacts, each of which
was ﬁrst expressed by some partial-area root.
With the deﬁnition of base overlapping root now in place, we
can deﬁne the general notion of overlapping root in a recursive
manner as follows.
Deﬁnition. (Overlapping Root): A concept L 2 V is an overlapping
root if either (1) it is a base overlapping root; or there exist
concepts C1 and C2 (C1 – C2) such that desc(L, C1), desc(L, C2), and
either (2) C1 is an overlapping root and C2 is a partial-area root or
(3) both C1 and C2 are overlapping roots. For both Cases (2) and (3),
the hierarchical paths from L to C1 and from L to C2 do not contain
other (intermediate) overlapping roots.
Let us note that the qualifying pair of ancestors (C1, C2) is not
necessarily unique. That is, more than one pair of ancestors might
satisfy the requirements. The deﬁnition of overlapping root is well
illustrated in Fig. 5. The yellow concepts, Body ﬂuid sample and
Acellular blood (serum or plasma) specimen, are base overlapping
roots (Case (1)). The orange concept Blood specimen follows Case
(2) since one parent, Body ﬂuid sample, is an overlapping root and
the other, Drug specimen, is a partial-area root. Finally, the green
concepts Serum specimen and Serum specimen from blood product
are overlapping roots according to Case (3) since each is a child
of two overlapping roots.
Case (1) denotes the fact that base overlapping roots, deﬁned
above, form the foundation upon which other overlapping roots
are deﬁned. Cases (2) and (3) of the deﬁnition (the recurrences)
designate certain points in the hierarchy below the level of the
base overlapping concepts as being signiﬁcant convergences of
knowledge and thus warranting new grouping structures. A

22

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

Fig. 6. (a) Some overlapping roots (shown as multi-colored boxes) from the area {substance} in the Specimen hierarchy; (b) corresponding excerpt of the d-partial-area
taxonomy representation of {substance}, where the embedded boxes are d-partial-areas.

concept satisfying Case (2) or Case (3) in particular is called a derived overlapping root.
In Fig. 5, Blood specimen is a derived overlapping root according
to Case (2). Its two qualifying ancestors are its parents Body ﬂuid
sample, a base overlapping root, and Drug specimen, a partial-area
root. Serum specimen and Serum specimen from blood product are
also derived overlapping roots. The two parents of Serum specimen
are base overlapping roots. On the other hand, the two parents of
Serum specimen from blood product are both derived overlapping
roots.
The excerpt of the Specimen hierarchy’s area {substance} in
Fig. 6a—some of which we saw already in Fig. 5—shows six of its
overlapping roots, highlighted with multi-coloring. (All lines in

the ﬁgure are IS-As.) This coloring scheme allows for easy identiﬁcation of an overlapping root’s respective partial-area root ancestors.4 The three partial-area roots are the single-colored concepts
on the top level of the ﬁgure. So, for example, Body ﬂuid sample, colored orange and blue on the second level, is an overlapping root that
is a descendant of Body substance sample (orange) and Fluid sample
(blue). In fact, it happens to be a child of both and is thus a base overlapping root. In Level 2, we ﬁnd another base overlapping root
Acellular blood (serum or plasma) specimen, colored blue and yellow,
4
Let us note that the coloring used in this concept-level diagram has nothing to do
with the coloring used previously in the taxonomy diagrams, where areas were
colored to highlight their respective levels.

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

as well as the non-overlapping concept Stool specimen, a descendant
of only one partial-area root Body substance sample. Fecal ﬂuid
sample, colored orange and blue on Level 3, is also a base overlapping
root due to the fact that its two parents are non-overlapping concepts. The derived overlapping roots begin to appear on that level,
too. They are the two concepts Blood specimen and Serum specimen,
both colored orange, blue, and yellow. Blood specimen is a child of
one base overlapping root, Body ﬂuid sample, in Level 2 and one partial-area root, Drug specimen (see Case (2) of the deﬁnition). Serum
specimen is a child of the two base overlapping roots in Level 2 (Case
(3)). Note that both have descendants that are not overlapping roots
(e.g., Mixed venous blood specimen). On Level 4, we ﬁnd the last derived overlapping root Serum specimen from blood product.
It should be noted that overlapping concepts having a single
parent cannot be overlapping roots. Again, the purpose of this designation is to highlight knowledge convergence points for which
multiple parents are necessary. As an example, the concept Acidiﬁed serum sample has as its only parent the derived overlapping
root Serum specimen and is thus not an overlapping root (see
Fig. 6a). Similarly, the derived overlapping root Blood specimen
has 12 descendants, such as Whole blood sample, Arterial blood specimen, and Cord blood specimen, none of which are overlapping
roots. (Note that these descendants are not shown in the excerpt
in Fig. 6a. They will be shown in the full ﬁgure in Section 4.) As
these examples demonstrate, there are overlapping concepts that
are not overlapping roots, even though their parents are derived
overlapping roots.
3.3. Disjoint partial-areas
With the deﬁnition of overlapping root in place, we can now
proceed to establish a partition of an entire area whose partialareas overlap. Moreover, each of the concept groups collectively
forming the partition will be singly-rooted. We will refer to such
concept groups as disjoint partial-areas (d-partial-areas, for short).
The initial set of d-partial-areas is derived by removing those portions of the original partial-areas that constitute overlaps, leaving
only non-overlapping concepts. For example, the d-partial-area
Body substance sample contains one additional concept Stool specimen beyond its root. It is obtained from the original partial-area of
the same name having 47 total concepts by removing the overlapping roots Fecal ﬂuid sample and Body ﬂuid sample along with the
latter’s descendants (see Fig. 6a). Clearly, such d-partial-areas are
all disjoint with respect to each other and also with respect to
the entire set of overlapping concepts. And they are each singlyrooted.
The remainder of the d-partial-areas are created in the context
of the set of overlapping concepts based on the overlapping roots.
In fact, each overlapping root will be the root of its own newly derived d-partial-area. Intuitively, such a d-partial-area is the portion
of the area residing ‘‘between’’ an overlapping root, say, CR and the
descendants of CR that are also overlapping roots. For example,
consider the overlapping root Body ﬂuid sample. The concepts that
are removed in order to form its d-partial-area are the overlapping
root child Blood specimen along with all its respective descendants
and the other overlapping root child Serum specimen with its two
children (see Fig. 6a). The concepts that are left in the d-partialarea rooted at Body ﬂuid sample are, besides itself, its seven children (e.g., Amniotic ﬂuid specimen) and its grandchildren which
are children of the child Cerebrospinal ﬂuid sample. (Note that only
one such child is shown in Fig. 6a, as it is an excerpt. All ten descendants appear in the full ﬁgure in Section 4.)
More formally, let CR be an overlapping root. Then it is designated as the root of its own d-partial-area with the name ‘‘CR.’’ Furthermore, let C be an overlapping concept—but not an overlapping
root—which is a descendant of CR such that there are no other over-

23

lapping roots on the paths between C and CR. Then C is a member of
the d-partial-area CR. For example, consider the overlapping root
Blood specimen and its descendant Mixed venous blood specimen
in Fig. 6a. Since the intermediate concept Venous blood specimen
on the only path from Mixed venous blood specimen to Blood specimen is not an overlapping root, Mixed venous blood specimen belongs to the d-partial-area Blood specimen. It is possible to prove
that CR is unique for any given C, and hence C’s membership in a
d-partial-area is well-deﬁned. Moreover, it is possible to prove that
for each overlapping concept C there is always such a CR.
3.4. Disjoint partial-area taxonomy
From the d-partial-areas, we can form an abstraction network
that enhances the previous partial-area taxonomy framework [2]
and highlights the structural subtleties of the overlapping portions
of the partial-areas. This new network is called the disjoint partialarea taxonomy (d-partial-area taxonomy, for short). Those d-partialareas derived directly from the existing partial-areas—and consisting only of non-overlapping concepts—hold the same place as their
predecessors in the d-partial-area taxonomy. Moreover, partialareas originally having no overlapping concepts retain their places
as nodes and are also designated d-partial-areas in the new network. The child-of relationships emanating from these d-partialareas and extending into other areas are derived as done previously for the partial-areas.
The d-partial-areas comprising overlapping concepts are also
elevated to the status of nodes in the d-partial-area taxonomy.
Each is displayed as a box with its name (i.e., its unique overlapping root) inside and its number of concepts in parentheses.
Child-of links are deﬁned for these new nodes in a similar manner
to those for areas and partial-areas, but here the overlapping roots
play a role. Let A and B be two d-partial-areas, such that the concept A (the overlapping root of the former) has a parent in the latter. Then there exists a child-of from the d-partial-area A to the dpartial-area B. A portion of the d-partial-area taxonomy for the
area {substance} derived from the excerpt of its hierarchy shown
in Fig. 6a can be seen in Fig. 6b. For example, there is a child-of from
the d-partial-area Fecal ﬂuid sample to the d-partial-area Body substance sample since, in Fig. 6a, there is an IS-A from the concept Fecal ﬂuid sample to the concept Stool specimen which resides in Body
substance sample. As can be seen in Fig. 6b, the d-partial-area
nodes, like the partial-area nodes, are embedded in their respective
area, which in this case is {substance}, colored green following
Fig. 1.
3.5. Enhanced abstraction of the complex overlapping concepts in
disjoint partial-areas
The described taxonomies provide abstraction-level views of
the content of a SNOMED hierarchy. For example, the area taxonomy (Fig. 1) shows that there are 81 concepts having exactly the
one relationship substance. The partial-area taxonomy (Fig. 2) also
conveys the overarching semantics of these concepts. There are 44
ﬂuid samples, 23 drug specimens, 47 body substance samples, and
13 food specimens. Those four large groups constitute most of the
concepts representing specimens with only one relationship to the
Substance hierarchy of SNOMED. There are some other small
groups, including Gaseous material specimen (3), Microbial isolate
specimen (2), and Plant specimen (1). Reviewing this information,
the user gets a summary of the content of this area. In contrast,
the area {morphology} has just one partial-area Lesion sample of
14 concepts. (This consolidated view was obtained following the
auditing of the 2004 release of the Specimen hierarchy supported
by the taxonomies [2]. The area {morphology} had six partial-areas

24

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

Fig. 7. The d-partial-areas Device specimen, Specimen from patient, and Blood bag
specimen, from patient of the area {identity}.

in the earlier version, but the auditing found that all fall under
Lesion sample.)
When users want to view concepts with both substance and
morphology relationships, they can utilize the area {morphology,
substance} in the second level having 11 concepts. This area is a
child of both {substance} and {morphology} (Fig. 1). As it happens,
the area has 11 partial-areas of one concept each, e.g., Effusion sample and Cyst ﬂuid sample (Fig. 2). As shown in [2,3], this view provided by the partial-area taxonomy was very helpful in exposing
errors in the Specimen hierarchy.
The partial-area taxonomy view is particularly useful when the
different partial-areas of an area are disjoint, but it is somewhat
deﬁcient when the partial-areas overlap. As was discussed above,
those overlapping parts of a partial-area contain concepts that
are semantically more complex than concepts of non-overlapping
parts of the same partial-area. Furthermore, the unit of a partialarea with an overlap is not semantically uniform. Hence, the difﬁculty of comprehending such concepts is magniﬁed. For example,
out of the 23 drug-specimen concepts in the partial-area of that
name in the area {substance}, 21 are also ﬂuid samples, while 20
are also body substance samples. Furthermore, 12 concepts are
both ﬂuid samples and body substance samples. Hence, the knowledge conveyed by the partial-areas of the area {substance} (Fig. 2) is
hiding a more complex situation. They provide a relatively superﬁcial perspective where a more reﬁned view is needed. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 1, the area {substance} contains only 81
concepts, where overlapping concepts appear in multiple counts
of the sizes of the partial-areas in Fig. 2.
The desired reﬁned view of an area with overlapping partialareas is provided by the d-partial-area taxonomy introduced
above. In Fig. 6b, we see that the overlap of the three partial-areas
just discussed is concentrated under two d-partial-areas: Body ﬂuid
sample of 11 concepts, capturing an overlap of Body substance sample and Fluid sample; and Acellular blood (serum or plasma) specimen
of one concept, capturing an overlap of Drug Specimen and Fluid
sample. In the d-partial-area taxonomy, the children of these two
d-partial-areas, Blood specimen of 13 concepts and Serum specimen
of two concepts, denote the overlaps of the three partial-areas. In
turn, a deeper level of overlap is indicated by the grandchild d-partial-area Serum specimen from blood product of one concept. As we
see, the names (overlapping roots) of the d-partial-areas communicate more precise knowledge of the content of the overlapping
concepts. The full d-partial-area taxonomy for that portion of the
area {substance} from which Fig. 6b was extracted will appear in

Section 4 below. More such knowledge was excluded from
Fig. 6a and 6b for the sake of brevity and clarity.
Importantly, each d-partial-area of the overlapping concepts
consists of a semantically uniform group, where its name, e.g.,
Blood specimen, characterizes the concepts of the group very well.
Hence, the d-partial-area taxonomy is a vehicle for more readily
comprehending the nature of the overlapping concepts. In another
example corresponding to Fig. 3, the d-partial-area taxonomy will
have a minimal overlap of just one concept, Blood bag specimen,
from patient, between the two partial-areas of Fig. 3, Device specimen and Specimen from patient. This overlap appears as one d-partial-area, Blood bag specimen, from patient, containing only that
concept. Note that in the d-partial-area taxonomy, this d-partialarea is the child of the two semantically uniform d-partial-areas
Device specimen (18) and Specimen from patient (1), which are
now uniform due to the removal of the overlapping concept
(Fig. 7). Thus, the d-partial-area taxonomy reveals both the uniform semantics of the overlapping subgroup and the precise size
of its extent (by the number appearing alongside the name) as well
as the uniform semantics of the d-partial-areas obtained by the removal of the overlapping concepts from the partial-areas of the
partial-area taxonomy. This enhanced view afforded by the d-partial-area taxonomy supports a better auditing regimen for the
complex overlapping concepts, which is demonstrated in the companion paper [4].
There are two issues regarding the display of the d-partial-area
taxonomy. One is the arrangement of d-partial-areas within an
area. In the partial-area taxonomy (e.g., Fig. 2), no child-of hierarchical relationships exist between partial-areas of the same area
because each is based on and contains a root of the area. When
we display one partial-area below another (see, e.g., the area {substance} in Fig. 2), no hierarchical arrangement is implied. It is just a
layout expediency.
In the d-partial-area taxonomy, there are child-of’s between dpartial-areas in a given area. In fact, any d-partial-area rooted at
Table 1
Statistics of overlapping concepts at Levels 1 and 2.
Area

C

V

V/C (%)

D

Avg = V/D

Substance
Topography
Procedure
Identity
Topography, procedure
Topography, morphology

81
333
20
20
380
18

35
116
3
1
6
1

43
35
15
5
2
6

9
52
3
1
6
1

3.9
2.2
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

Total

852

162

19

72

2.3

C = # concepts; V = # overlapping concepts; D = # overlapping roots.

Table 2
Intersections involving partial-area Tissue specimen.
Second partial-area

C

V

V/C (%)

Specimen from eye
Ear sample
Specimen from breast
Cardiovascular sample
Products of conception tissue sample
Genitourinary sample
Dermatological sample
Spec. from digestive system
Musculoskeletal sample
Respiratory sample
Endocrine sample
Specimen from central nervous system
Spec. from thymus gland
Specimen from trophoblast

18
2
8
13
12
73
6
74
35
41
12
4
2
2

12
1
4
3
3
22
2
30
22
7
3
1
1
1

67
50
50
23
8
27
33
39
63
16
25
25
50
50

Total

302

112

35

C = # concepts; V = # overlapping concepts.

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

25

Fig. 8. The nine overlapping roots from the area {substance} are shown as multi-colored boxes among other concepts.

an overlapping root (be it base or derived) has multiple child-of’s to
other d-partial-areas of the same area. To reﬂect the hierarchical
nature of these child-of’s, we try to position the d-partial-areas
such that they are below their respective parents, and the childof’s are in an upward direction.
As a result, there is a contrast between the detailed display of an
area of many overlapping concepts, such as {substance} in Fig. 6b,
and an area without overlapping concepts, such as {morphology}.
The d-partial-area taxonomy contains both kinds of areas. Thus,
there is a disparity in the display of these two kinds of areas in regard to their nature and level of detail. As we will discuss below,
the three taxonomies are best used in concert in a kind of multiscale display.

4. Results
The July 2007 release of the Specimen hierarchy of SNOMED
consists of 1056 active concepts, of which 162 are overlapping.

We have used the July 2007 release in this paper because in the
companion paper [4], we report on the application of a systematic
auditing regimen to both the July 2007 and 2009 releases. The partial-area taxonomy and the d-partial-area taxonomy for July 2009,
whose contents were affected by the audit of the July 2007 release,
will appear in [4]. Most of the overlapping concepts reside in Level
l areas, i.e., those having one relationship. In fact, roughly one third
(155 out of 468) of the Level 1 concepts are overlapping, and these
are found primarily in {topography} and {substance}. Overlapping
concepts also appear in the partial-areas of areas with two relationships, but in far fewer numbers. In fact, there are only seven
of them. Six are in {topography, procedure}, and the other is in
{topography, morphology}. The statistics of the overlapping concepts in Levels 1 and 2 are given in Table 1. For each area, we list
its total number of concepts C (Column 2), number of overlapping
concepts V (Column 3), the percentage of overlapping concepts
(Column 4), the number of d-partial-areas with overlapping roots
D (Column 5), and the average number of overlapping concepts
per d-partial-area: V/D (Column 6). For example, {substance} has

Fig. 9. The d-partial-area taxonomy excerpt consisting of 13 d-partial-areas corresponding to the concept network appearing in Fig. 8.

26

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

Fig. 10. The d-partial-area taxonomy node for the area {substance} containing 19 embedded d-partial-areas. The numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of concepts in
the respective d-partial-areas.

Fig. 11. An excerpt of the d-partial-area taxonomy for the area {topography} consisting of 30 d-partial-areas.

81 concepts and 35 of them are overlapping (43%). It also has nine
overlapping roots which head d-partial-areas, with about four concepts per each such d-partial-area, on average.
Most overlapping concepts in the area {topography} are found in
intersections with the partial-area Tissue specimen which contains
126 concepts. We have tabulated these results separately in Table 2. For example, the partial-area Specimen from eye has 18 concepts. Its intersection with Tissue specimen has 12 of them (67%).
The full complement of nine overlapping roots from the area
{substance} can be seen as the multi-colored boxes in the excerpt
in Fig. 8. The ﬁgure follows the color conventions of Fig. 6a. The
top four concepts are the area’s roots. Among the overlapping

roots, ﬁve are base overlapping roots and four are derived overlapping roots. The remaining white concepts are overlapping concepts
that elaborate the semantics of the overlapping roots of their
respective d-partial-areas.
The portion of the d-partial-area taxonomy for the area {substance} corresponding to the concept diagram in Fig. 8 is shown
in Fig. 9. It presents a precise abstraction of the conﬁguration of
the overlapping concepts within {substance}. Note that the numbers of concepts listed for the top-level d-partial-areas are actually
the numbers of non-overlapping concepts appearing in the original
partial-areas from which these d-partial-areas are derived. For
example, Drug specimen (2) has the two non-overlapping concepts

Table 3
Concept distributions in seven SNOMED hierarchies.
Hierarchy

C

V

V/C (%)

D

Cmult

Cmult/C (%)

Vmult

Event
Situation
Pharmaceutical product
Procedure
Specimen
Body structure
Clinical ﬁnding

3661
3237
17,140
52,687
1330
31,155
98,414

0
86
1047
7878
191
0
13,943

0
2.7
6.1
15.0
14.4
0
14.2

0
67
949
3374
80
0
3127

86
387
7721
27,031
788
13,418
44,544

2.4
12.0
45.1
51.3
59.3
43.1
45.3

0
67
963
5846
130
0
9841

Total

207,624

23,145

11.2

7597

93,975

45.3

16,847

C = # concepts; V = # overlapping concepts; D = # overlapping roots; Cmult = # concepts having multiple parents; Vmult = # overlapping concepts having multiple parents.

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

from the partial-area of the same name, containing a total of 23
concepts, in Fig. 2. They are the area root Drug specimen plus a
non-overlapping child not shown in Fig. 8. The entire content of
the partial-area Drug specimen is distributed among the d-partialarea Drug specimen and all its descendants. This can be seen by
summing up the numbers of concepts in those d-partial-areas:
2 + 1 + 13 + 2 + 4 + 1 = 23. The same holds true for the other top-level d-partial-areas and their respective descendants in the ﬁgure.
The complete node for {substance} in the d-partial-area taxonomy is shown in Fig. 10, which differs from Fig. 9 only in the inclusion of the six additional d-partial-areas derived from the
corresponding six partial-areas (Fig. 2) that do not contain any
overlapping concepts. The isolation of these d-partial-areas from
the others conveys the absence of overlaps. Overall, this network
can be used, for example, as a vehicle for comprehending the details of the kinds of overlapping concepts and their numbers in
the underlying SNOMED hierarchy.
Fig. 11 provides a larger excerpt of the portion of the d-partialarea taxonomy appearing within the area {topography}, highlighting the extensive overlapping among its partial-areas. As shown
in Table 1, this area has 116 overlapping concepts distributed
among 52 d-partial-areas. Most of the overlapping concepts have
Tissue specimen as one of their partial-areas, as listed in Table 2.
In the top level of Fig. 11, we see the 15 d-partial-areas obtained
by removing all overlapping concepts from the original partialareas. On the next level down, we ﬁnd 13 d-partial-areas having
base overlapping roots. Two d-partial-areas with derived overlapping roots appear on the bottom level. Many other d-partial-areas
with few concepts have been omitted. Again, it should be noted
that the intersection of two partial-areas may contain several overlapping roots. For example, the intersection of Tissue specimen and
Cardiovascular sample has three overlapping roots, as shown in the
ﬁgure: Tissue specimen from heart, Heart valve tissue, and Native
heart valve sample.
To illustrate the general applicability of our abstraction approach, we have applied it to all seven of the SNOMED hierarchies
that have outgoing lateral relationships. (The other 12 hierarchies
have no such relationships, rendering our methodology inapplicable to them.) The results are listed in Table 3. For each of the seven
hierarchies, the table gives its total number of concepts, the number of overlapping concepts and their percentage, and the number
of overlapping roots. For example, the Pharmaceutical Product
hierarchy has a total of 17,410 concepts, of which 1047 are overlapping (6.1%). The number of overlapping roots is 949. Let us note
that in Pharmaceutical Product almost all the overlapping concepts
are overlapping roots (1047 compared to 949). As it happens, the
hierarchies Event and Body Structure have no overlapping concepts whatsoever.
As a point of comparison, we also list in Table 3 the number of
concepts having multiple parents (and their percentage), along
with the number of overlapping concepts having that characteristic. These numbers will be discussed further below. The Pharmaceutical Product hierarchy has 7721 concepts (45%) with multiple
parents, of which only 963 (5.6%) are overlapping. As can be seen,
there are only 14 (=963  949) non-root overlapping concepts having multiple parents. Note that 84 overlapping concepts have only
one parent.

5. Discussion
5.1. Taxonomy support for presentation of terminology content
The value of a terminological knowledge-base depends on the
accuracy and reliability of its constituent knowledge. This is true
from the perspective of both ad hoc users and developers of soft-

27

ware systems, such as EHR software and decision-support systems,
that are dependent on that knowledge. Moreover, the ability to
visualize and assess the knowledge’s underlying structural organization is a critical factor contributing to terminology usability,
deployment, and maintenance. The area and partial-area taxonomy
abstraction networks have been shown to support maintenance efforts for SNOMED [2] and the NCIt [8]. However, in this paper, we
have discussed some deﬁciencies in these abstraction networks
regarding complex portions of the terminology involving what
we call overlapping concepts. The d-partial-area taxonomy that
we have introduced extends the area taxonomy paradigm to more
properly present the overlapping concepts by highlighting semantically uniform groups and their sizes. For example, Fig. 9 highlights the groups Blood specimen (13), Serum specimen (2), and
Plasma specimen (4), which were originally hidden but tacitly accounted for multiple times in Body substance sample (47), Fluid
sample (44), and Drug specimen (23) in Fig. 2.
In Fig. 11, showing the area {topography}, we ﬁnd only two dpartial-areas with derived overlapping roots. We ﬁnd more than
twice that number, with many concepts in their d-partial-areas,
in the excerpt of {substance} in Fig. 9. What we see in {topography}
is extensive overlapping with many base overlapping roots but not
as complex a pattern as is found in {substance}. An interesting ﬁnding revealed by Fig. 11 is that Products of conception tissue sample,
the second d-partial-area from the right in Level 1, represents a
modeling error. Its root should not actually have been a root but
rather an overlapping concept of Tissue specimen and Genitourinary
sample.
In the present paper, we studied the complexity of overlapping
concepts, ﬁnding what we call ‘‘overlapping roots’’ that represent
the convergence of multiple hierarchical paths originating at the
roots of an area (see Section 3.1). A variety we call ‘‘base overlapping root’’ is less complex than the ‘‘derived overlapping root.’’
Within the latter, we have identiﬁed different kinds according to
Cases (2) and (3) of the deﬁnition (see Section 3.2). The organizational subtleties of the various kinds of overlapping concepts are
abstracted in the d-partial-area taxonomy that we have introduced
in this paper. The network breaks down the highly tangled group of
overlapping concepts of an area into subsets in a manner that summarizes their hierarchical conﬁguration and supports orientation
into their nature. This phenomenon is demonstrated, for example,
in Fig. 10, where nine d-partial-areas (rooted at derived overlapping roots) on Levels 2 and 3 expose the very complex modeling
of the 35 overlapping concepts in a clear and unambiguous way,
while all this knowledge is hidden ‘‘under the hood’’ in the partial-area taxonomy of Fig. 2. The reﬁned view helps in assessing
the correctness of the modeling of this highly complex portion of
the SNOMED hierarchy.

5.2. Taxonomy support for auditing
We have proposed and implemented SNOMED auditing regimens that make use of the programmatically derived area and partial-area taxonomies [2,3] and have shown that they promote more
efﬁcient and effective auditing. In the companion paper [4] to this
paper, we present an auditing methodology based on the additional reﬁnements appearing in the d-partial-area taxonomy, thus
demonstrating its usefulness and signiﬁcance in SNOMED quality
assurance.
In [16], we presented an initial study regarding the complexity
of overlapping concepts of multiple partial-areas and their likelihood of being erroneous. The observations in [16] are in line with
the theme that complex concepts in their many varieties are often
more probably in error. The auditing approach used there just
called for a review of all the overlapping concepts.

28

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

For the sake of modularity and readability, we have deferred the
presentation of a systematic auditing regimen based on the d-partial-area taxonomy to the companion paper [4]. The new methodology is more detailed and sophisticated than the initial one
employed in [16], making use of the inter-relationships among
the overlapping concepts and their groupings into d-partial-areas.
In fact, the partition of the overlapping concepts into disjoint sets
exhibiting semantic uniformity suggests a regimen of ‘‘groupbased auditing,’’ a theme which we have successfully employed
in other related contexts [3,9,10,17].
5.3. Further applicability of the methodology
While our abstraction methodology was formulated in the context of SNOMED, its applicability extends to other DL-based
terminologies such as the NCIt. Moreover, terminologies such as
Kaiser-Permanente’s CMT [18] and the VA’s ERT [19], that have
been derived in part from SNOMED, may prove to be fertile grounds
for additional applications. By 2015, SNOMED is slated to become a
standard for problem-list encoding in EHRs under the HITECH initiative [20]. It is thus reasonable to assume that further derivatives
from SNOMED will emerge. SNOMED’s design, in fact, anticipates
the need for extensions and subsets in order to craft terminological
artifacts that are tuned to the needs of individual hospitals and
other organizations. Its ‘‘reference set speciﬁcation’’ [21] serves
the purpose of extracting components of SNOMED tailored to particular organizational preferences and use-cases.
5.4. Abstraction networks
In reviewing abstraction networks of terminologies, we distinguish between extrinsic and intrinsic networks. In the former,
the nodes of the network represent categories obtained from
knowledge outside the terminology itself. The Semantic Network
[22] of the UMLS [23] is such an example. The nodes of the Semantic Network, called semantic types, represent known, broad categories in the biomedical ﬁeld. A modiﬁed abstraction network for the
UMLS is the Reﬁned Semantic Network (RSN) [13,24]. A deﬁning
feature of the RSN is the fact that the extents of its types (i.e.,
the sets of concepts assigned respective types) are semantically
uniform and disjoint, offering a clearer abstraction view.
In an intrinsic abstraction network, the categories are derived
directly from the speciﬁc concepts of the terminology. An example
of such a network is the partial-area taxonomy, which has been
described above. In addition to its derivation from SNOMED
hierarchies, it has been used in the context of the NCIt [8]. The
d-partial-area taxonomy is also clearly intrinsic. Another example
of an intrinsic network is the object-oriented schema [25,26] that
has been derived from the MED [27]. As with the taxonomies,
concepts that exhibit more relationships than their parents serve
as roots of and to name the classes in the schema. In terms of size,
the schema is relatively small in its number of nodes compared to
the partial-area taxonomy.

the methodology of this paper is not applicable to a SNOMED hierarchy without any outgoing relationships at all. An initial effort to
handle such a hierarchy based on converse relationships appeared
in [6]. Moreover, the d-partial-area taxonomy is only pertinent
when there are overlapping partial-areas within the partial-area
taxonomy. Otherwise, the two taxonomies are identical.
In general, an abstraction network should represent a signiﬁcant reduction in size (i.e., number of nodes) vis-à-vis its underlying concept network. For the Specimen hierarchy, the area
taxonomy provides a 0.023 reduction factor (24 areas versus
1056 concepts). The partial-area taxonomy has a reduction factor
of 0.34 (361 partial-areas versus 1056 concepts). The d-partial-area
taxonomy only has a reduction factor of 0.41 (433 d-partial-areas
versus 1056 concepts). Note that the higher reduction factor for
the d-partial-area taxonomy is the justiﬁable price paid for the enhanced view obtained by the inclusion of the d-partial-areas that
abstract the more complex overlapping concepts. There is no impact on the representation of those partial-areas experiencing no
overlap in the partial-area taxonomy. Let us also note that the relatively high reduction factor for the partial-area taxonomy is a result of a large number of partial-areas containing just one concept
each (so-called ‘‘singletons’’). As was shown in [3], such partialareas tend to signal errors. It is interesting to see if the number
of such partial-areas will decrease as a result of auditing them.
An initial promising result is brought up in [7]. Further research
into this issue is required.
The reduction factors aside, the three taxonomies complement
each other in terms of granularity of display, with a zooming effect
achieved as one moves successively through them starting from
the area taxonomy. When used together in this manner, they provide a multi-scale display. The area taxonomy offers a global view
of the hierarchy’s layout and the partial-area taxonomy provides a
more semantically focused view of the areas, whereas the real beneﬁts of the d-partial-area taxonomy are seen at the local level—on
the scale of an individual area—where it helps to reveal the complexity of the conﬁguration of the overlapping concepts.
One might question whether there are simpler ways to identify
‘‘complex’’ concepts rather than having to go through the abstraction analysis presented in this paper. For example, one might
choose to consider the easily identiﬁed concepts having multiple
parents as being complex. Let us note that the overlapping concepts are not simply a subset of the multi-parent concepts. Only
a root overlapping concept must have, by deﬁnition, more than
one parent. As we see in Table 1, only 72 out of 162 overlapping
concepts, in the Specimen hierarchy of July 2007, are overlapping
roots. The other overlapping concepts have mostly a single parent.
See also Fig. 8 where only the nine overlapping roots are multiparented. Similar statistics are seen in Table 3. In the seven hierarchies for which our analysis is applicable, we ﬁnd a total of 93,975
multi-parented concepts (45.3%). In that same context, there are a
total of 23,145 overlapping concepts, with 16,847 being multiparented.

5.5. Limitations and future work

6. Conclusion

The area and partial-area taxonomies are available only for DLbased terminologies. Abstraction of terminologies is very delicate,
and no one model of abstraction networks is expected to ﬁt all terminologies. However, more research is needed to explore abstraction networks for other families of terminologies and
terminological systems, e.g., the ones mentioned in Section 5.4.
The beneﬁts obtained from abstraction networks in regard to
auditing should motivate more research in this direction.
A limitation of the taxonomy approach is that it depends on the
existing relationships deﬁned for a hierarchy of SNOMED. Hence,

SNOMED CT is one of the leading terminologies being used in a
variety of applications worldwide. However, it contains hundreds
of thousands of concepts and has an inherent complexity that
could hinder its further adoption as well as its ongoing maintenance. A new abstraction network, called the disjoint partial-area
taxonomy, has been introduced to provide a better high-level view
of portions of a SNOMED hierarchy containing concepts of a particularly complex nature. It reﬁnes our previous abstraction network,
the partial-area taxonomy, for SNOMED. The new network focuses
on the location and number of such complex concepts and high-

Y. Wang et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 15–29

lights their modeling and local neighborhoods. Overall, users are
provided with a summary account of the ‘‘lay of the land’’ that
can facilitate orientation to and assessment of SNOMED’s content.
Our methodology was demonstrated by applying it to SNOMED’s
Specimen hierarchy. In a companion paper [4], we present a systematic auditing regimen based on the disjoint partial-area taxonomy, demonstrating its utility to terminology maintenance
personnel.

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

Acknowledgment

[16]

This work was partially supported by the NLM under Grant R01-LM008912-01A1.

[17]

References
[1] IHTSDO: SNOMED CT. <http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct> [accessed
30.03.11].
[2] Wang Y, Halper M, Min H, Perl Y, Chen Y, Spackman KA. Structural
methodologies for auditing SNOMED. J Biomed Inform 2007;40(5):561–81.
[3] Halper M, Wang Y, Min H, Chen Y, Hripcsak G, Perl Y, et al. Analysis of error
concentrations in SNOMED. In: Teich JM, Suermondt J, Hripcsak G, editors.
Proceedings of 2007 AMIA annual symposium, Chicago, IL; 2007. p. 314–8.
[4] Wang Y, Halper M, Wei D, Gu H, Perl Y, Xu J, et al. Auditing complex concepts of
SNOMED using a reﬁned hierarchical abstraction network. J Biomed Inform.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.08.016.
[5] IHTSDO. SNOMED CT abstract logical models and representational forms (draft
document); January 2008.
[6] Wei D, Halper M, Elhanan G, Chen Y, Perl Y, Geller J, et al. Auditing SNOMED
relationships using a converse abstraction network. In: Proceedings of 2009
AMIA annual symposium, San Francisco, CA; 2009. p. 685–9.
[7] Wei D, Wang Y, Perl Y, Xu J, Halper M, Spackman KA. Complexity measures to
track the evolution of a SNOMED hierarchy. In: Suermondt J, Evans RS, OhnoMachado L, editors. Proceedings of 2008 AMIA annual symposium,
Washington, DC; 2008. p. 778–82.
[8] Min H, Perl Y, Chen Y, Halper M, Geller J, Wang Y. Auditing as part of the
terminology design life cycle. JAMIA 2006;13(6):676–90.
[9] Chen Y, Gu H, Perl Y, Geller J, Halper M. Structural group auditing of a UMLS
semantic type’s extent. J Biomed Inform 2009;42(1):41–52.
[10] Chen Y, Gu H, Perl Y, Geller J. Structural group-based auditing of missing
hierarchical relationships in UMLS. J Biomed Inform 2009;42(3):452–67.
[11] Geller J, Morrey CP, Xu J, Halper M, Elhanan G, Perl Y, et al. Comparing
inconsistent relationship conﬁgurations indicating UMLS errors. In:

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

29

Proceedings of 2009 AMIA annual symposium, San Francisco, CA; 2009. p.
193–7.
Cimino JJ, Min H, Perl Y. Consistency across the hierarchies of the UMLS
Semantic Network and Metathesaurus. J Biomed Inform 2003;36(6):450–61.
Geller J, Gu H, Perl Y, Halper M. Semantic reﬁnement and error correction in
large terminological knowledge bases. Data Knowledge Eng 2003;45(1):1–32.
Gu H, Perl Y, Elhanan G, Min H, Zhang L, Peng Y. Auditing concept
categorizations in the UMLS. Artif Intell Med 2004;31(1):29–44.
Gu H, Hripcsak G, Chen Y, Morrey CP, Elhanan G, Cimino JJ, et al. Evaluation of a
UMLS auditing process of semantic type assignments. In: Teich JM, Suermondt
J, Hripcsak G, edtiors. Proceedings of 2007 AMIA annual symposium, Chicago,
IL; 2007. p. 294–8.
Wang Y, Wei D, Xu J, Elhanan G, Perl Y, Halper M, et al. Auditing complex
concepts in overlapping subsets of SNOMED. In: Suermondt J, Evans RS, OhnoMachado L, editors. Proceedings of 2008 AMIA annual symposium,
Washington, DC; 2008. p. 273–7.
Chen Y, Gu H, Perl Y, Halper M, Xu J. Expanding the extent of a UMLS semantic
type via group neighborhood auditing. JAMIA 2009;16(5):746–57.
Dolin RH, Mattison JE, Cohn S, et al. Kaiser Permanente’s convergent medical
terminology. In: Fieschi M, Coiera E, Li Y-C, editors. Proceedings of Medinfo
2004, San Francisco, CA; 2004. p. 346–50.
Lincoln MJ, Brown SH, Nguyen V, Cromwell T, et al. US department of veterans
affairs enterprise reference terminology strategic overview. In: Fieschi M et al.,
editors. Proceedings of Medinfo2004, San Francisco, CA; 2004. p. 391–5.
Department of Health and Human Services. Health information technology:
initial set of standards, implementation speciﬁcations, and certiﬁcation
criteria for electronic health record technology. Final Rule, 45 CFR Part 170,
July 28; 2010.
SNOMED Clinical Terms reference sets: technical speciﬁcation. Technical
speciﬁcation, College of American Pathologists; July 2006.
The UMLS Semantic Network. <http://semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov>
[accessed 10.04.11].
Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS) – Home. <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
research/umls> [accessed 10.04.11].
Gu H, Perl Y, Geller J, Halper M, Liu L, Cimino JJ. Representing the UMLS as an
OODB: modeling issues and advantages. JAMIA 2000;7(1):66–80. selected for
reprint in: R. Haux and C. Kulikowski, editors, Yearbook of Medical
Informatics: Digital Libraries and Medicine (International Medical
Informatics Association), pages 271–285, Schattauer, Stuttgart, Germany,
2001.
Gu H, Halper M, Geller J, Perl Y. Beneﬁts of an object-oriented database
representation
for
controlled
medical
terminologies.
JAMIA
1999;6(4):283–303.
Liu L, Halper M, Geller J, Perl Y. Controlled vocabularies in OODBs: modeling
issues and implementation. Distrib Parallel Datab 1999;7(1):37–65.
Cimino JJ, Clayton PD, Hripcsak G, Johnson SB. Knowledge-based approaches to
the maintenance of a large controlled medical terminology. JAMIA
1994;1(1):35–50.

